Chapter 1: Necessity

Every world has its rules. Outsiders say the wasteland exists in a state of anarchy, but they are mistaken. Here, the rules are coarser and more fundamental than those of the wider world, but no less strict. Survival means learning to play a game that is unfair and unwinnable.

Jan had broken a rule: don’t steal from people more tooled up than you. He doubted he’d live to regret it.

A bell was ringing in the heart of the settlement. He could hear the cries of his pursuers and the barks of their hunting dogs. They were closing in. Jan halted his frantic run and cast his eyes up and down the ramshackle buildings lining the street, searching for somewhere to hide.

‘You, you, check down there!’ came the command. ‘Seb, Jonah, next street.’ It would be a matter of seconds before somebody rounded the corner.

Jan spotted a corrugated iron door, slightly ajar, and instantly made for it. He slipped inside just in time, carefully sliding the door shut. Just moments later he heard two pairs of footfalls; the sound of heavy steel-capped boots. Purposeful. Patient. He knew they’d find him eventually - there was plenty of daylight left. Jan cursed as they passed, then slumped despondently against the wall. He couldn’t hide for long.

Jan was a survivor; he’d always kept to the rules, but desperation had driven him this far. The hunger was a constant, rending pain that seemed to consume him from the inside. Jan’s options had narrowed until, on this final day, he had faced a stark choice between theft and starvation.

It was impossible to see anything in the gloom, but Jan could hear the dull whirr of working machinery. He closed his eyes, trying to focus. There had to be a way out.

He was no stranger to hardship. It was a marginal existence, scratching a living on the fringes of the hostile new ecosystem. He was a wastelander, rugged and tall, with the wiry physique of somebody overworked and underfed. He had no permanent home, nor intention of finding one, instead drifting between unregistered settlements and caravans, doing odd jobs in exchange for shelter and food. Hard times were common, but these last days had been the worst of all.

Jan stood and padded as softly as possible around the room. He found a length of chain and used it to secure the door, driving a metal bar through the loop and testing it a couple of times. It wouldn’t do for the soldiers to just walk in on him. He heard returning footfalls, realising a silent escape would be impossible.

Jan turned to equipping himself. Hesitantly, he cracked open one of the shutters, providing just enough light to work by. Motes of dust danced in the sunlight that knifed into the room. At the far end of the space industrial machinery clustered, still hidden in shadow. Hundreds of tools lined the walls and lay scattered across every flat surface, plenty of which would be serviceable as improvised weapons, but useless in a gunfight. A row of dust-sheeted, blocky forms caught Jan’s eye. Curious, he walked over, removing a sheet. Relief surged through him.

Printers; mass manufactured, robust, reliable and stamped with stylised deltas, the Arco insignia. A ‘gift’ to ensure this settlement’s cooperation. Jan lifted up the panel on one of the machines. He was presented with stacks of punch cards, all imprinted with images of tools. He removed and discarded several, searching through the rows for anything useful. The item he needed flipped up, and Jan slotted the card into the printer and threw a switch. The machine would need a few minutes.

Jan forced himself to be calm and think - a weapon was useless without a way out. Escape through the barricaded entrance would be impossible. He walked around the room, searching for another exit. There was nothing obvious, but he spotted a ladder that led to the high ceiling and a closed hatch.

A fist hammered on the door.

‘Chase is up, wastelander.’ The commanding voice he’d heard earlier. Jan ignored it as he dashed back to the printer - the roof would have to do. He bound his hands in rags; the dotbow would still be hot when it was extruded.

‘We know you’re in there.’ Jan still didn’t respond. ‘Let’s make this quick and easy.’ The voice paused, waiting for a reply. The printer continued to hiss and whirr, the dotbow now poking from its open base.

‘What are you making in there, huh? A shovel? Don’t try anything, you’ll be digging your own grave. We’ve got the place surrounded, no way out.’

‘If you let me go, I’ll return what I’ve taken,’ Jan offered. He sighed at the thought; in what world would it be that easy? He was close now; the bow was complete, he just needed the last of the ammunition. As the bolts came off the printer he slotted them into the magazine, weighing the need for extra ammunition against the risk of waiting.

‘Let you go?’ The man laughed, and his soldiers followed suit. Then suddenly, deadly serious, he said - ‘You’ve stolen from me.’ The laughter stopped.

‘It was just a bit of food. I can work off the debt…’

‘No no no,’ the man chided. ‘That’s not how this works. I’m a man of principle. The way I see it, you take what is mine, I take what is yours,’ he explained.

‘I was desperate... I have nothing to give you,’ Jan replied. Let them think he was scared, some pathetic, stupid wastelander. He knew he was being toyed with. They’d be fetching a torch, grenades, not taking any chances. He heard the chink of a rifle bolt being drawn back.

‘Did I ask you to give to me? No. No, I said I’m gonna take. If you come out now I’ll only take your hand. Fair enough, yes?’

Jan put the voice out of his mind, raising the dotbow to shoulder level and testing its weight. The printer had extruded it fully drawn, its cabling and springs held back by hundreds of pounds of tension. More footsteps now; reinforcements. He guessed he had seconds. Jan hitched the pack of stolen food onto his other shoulder, taking a few deep breaths.

‘We’re coming in, friend,’ the voice outside said as Jan shifted towards the door. ‘Don’t make a fuss and we’ll settle this man-to-man.’

With a blast the door flew inward, sending a dazzling shaft of sunlight into the dim workshop. Jan glimpsed a pair of rifles and another figure, his hands held high, raising something compact and round. He reflexively loosed the dotbow, sending bolts through the figures with an almost inaudible whistle. The men collapsed with strangled rattles.

‘Get back-’ someone shouted, as Jan darted sideways. A moment later he heard the sharp detonation of the grenade the first figure had dropped. Perhaps there were screams; with the ringing in his ears, it was impossible to tell.

Jan ran towards the ladder, pulling himself up to the ceiling hatch with the dotbow and pack slapping against his back. The hatch burst open and he hauled himself onto the roof. His muscles seemed to fail half way through the lift and he collapsed onto the hot metal, gasping in exhaustion. He rolled over helplessly and the pack of food slipped off his shoulder and slid back down the opening, bouncing as it struck the warehouse floor.

‘You’ve got nowhere left to go,’ came the shout from the street below. That wasn’t quite true. Jan stood, glancing down forlornly at the lost food and then over the forest of closely packed metal roofs. He could make it out of the settlement.

Jan fled as more shouts echoed up from ground level, his ears still ringing from the grenade blast. The landscape was uneven and he stumbled, slamming a knee hard onto the corrugated iron. There were shouts as the guards tried to encircle him. Ignoring the pain, Jan made his way across the last roof, jumping to ground level. Behind, the clatter of boots was growing closer once again. He heard another voice, loud but distant.

‘You’re already dead. Doesn’t bother me if it’s an absence of food or an excess of lead that gets you.’

The firebreak stretched ahead of Jan; a hundred metres of ashen soil that separated the jungle from what passed for civilisation. Without hesitation, he sprinted towards the perimeter, kicking up clouds of dusty ash. Rifle shots zipped past Jan’s head when he reached the fifty meter mark. At twenty metres, he heard the distinct chatter of an Arco machine-rifle and felt numberless bullets fill the air. At ten metres, it seemed as though the atmosphere had thickened, and his legs were straining beyond exhaustion. Then he was within the relative safety of the jungle, as the gunfire attenuated in the distance.

The afternoon rains were almost due, Jan was sure. The jungle air was hot and oppressive, thick with moisture and a stench of rotting vegetation. Colossal purple-green mosses and grotesque whorls of tendrils choked the dying native vegetation all around him. Nobody from the settlement dared travel this far. He was safe from any threat the human world could offer.

Jan hacked at the creepers ahead, trying to clear the path a little before he stumbled into an open clearing. The tree he’d been searching for swam into focus. It was dead, uprooted by the false plants, already disappearing beneath the thickening undergrowth. Jan scowled; the scene was sadly familiar. There was no permanence here.

In its place the invaders clustered; fleshy and purple, their fanned crowns tilted at fixed angles like solar panels. They moved almost imperceptibly, fighting for sunlight. Others were still, tied down by parasitic creepers that bore false fruits; plump white bulbs that were scattered across the ground. And arranged amongst the fallen fruit were carcasses, fertilising the earth. Jan walked forward hesitantly and poked a lump with the tip of his boot. A rat, its stomach bloated by a fatal reaction, burst open releasing a foul-smelling gas.

Jan retched, turning away. Even the ground felt wrong – fleshy tendrils undulated, writhing just below the threshold of noticeability. His eyelids felt heavy. It would be so easy to give into the jungle’s suffocating caress. But he kept putting one foot in front of the other.

In time, Jan stumbled his way towards a stream. The mosses hadn’t quite clogged it up and a shoal of slender, double-spined ‘fish’ were swimming their way through the water, twinned tails beating together. In amongst them was the quick flash of a true fish, an edible fish. Unthinkingly, Jan whipped his dotbow out and pulled the trigger, releasing the weapon’s tightly wound clockwork. The bolt missed by inches. The fish darted away and vanished from sight. Jan groaned; real fish were so rare that he would have to wait a week before he caught a glimpse of another one. In a week, he might be dead.

Afternoon thunder rolled and in minutes, the clear sky was occluded by a uniform blanket of cloud that brought driving sheets of rain. Jan sought shelter underneath an overhang, reviewing his meagre set of possessions as a way of passing the time.

Besides the Dotbow and conspicuous lack of food, Jan had a tarpaulin, some rope, flints, a canteen and a decent knife. He reached into a pocket and found the photograph of Eva, feeling the familiar thumbed edges, the creases where it had been folded.

She’d always been curious about the false plants, wanting to know what it was that prevented false life and true life from coexisting. She was curious about everything but, as with nearly all the questions she’d asked, Jan had never known the answer. It was just how things were. False plants and true plants could grow next to each other but sooner or later an animal, false or true, would graze on something it couldn’t digest and die. Thus the hybrid jungles, almost empty of animals, spread.

A sudden splashing noise made Jan jump. He turned and saw that dozens of the fish were swimming frantically upstream. He glimpsed one misjudge its jump and end up stranded on the riverbank. With a whoop of delight he ran to it, grabbing the fish delicately with both hands before it had time to flop back into the river. Jan would have eaten it raw right at that moment were it not for a new and terrifying thought. The fish were clearly swimming away from something. He had barely managed two paces before the monstrosity tore itself out of the water.

It was the length of an anaconda, but bulkier and without bones or skeleton, with a plasticky hide that glistened a pale translucent white. Two tails splayed out in a y-shaped frame; they beat together to slide the creature along the ground. It had no visible eyes, just a cluster of dark spots at the tip of its head. The thing reared up and managed a series of guttural clicks and whoops from a ring of spiracles that lined its neck.

Jan froze on the spot with the limp fish still in one hand, limbs unresponsive. The creature, known to wastelanders as the Pitchfork, swayed for what seemed like an eon as though trying to decide whether he was prey.

Jan finally turned and ran from the riverside. The Pitchfork made its mind up and lunged upwards, flicking its tails between the branches to give chase, its maw straining hungrily. The dense undergrowth slapped at Jan as he sprinted, muscles burning with exhaustion. His foot caught on a densely-knotted root and twisted, driving him hard onto the thin soil.

The Pitchfork would be upon him in moments. Jan desperately felt for the dotbow, the panic rising. It had spun off into the undergrowth. The creature had briefly lost him, its head blindly scanning back and forth mere meters from where he lay. His hand hit against the solidity of the bow, only to drive it further away. He cursed, twisting to hack at the ensnaring roots with the knife. His foot free, Jan lunged again for the dotbow and grabbed it by the stock. The Pitchfork’s whistling roar was growing louder.

Jan shifted onto one knee, raising the dotbow and fumbling two more bolts into the slot over the stock. He sighted along the barrel, steadied for a moment and fired. Both shots hit home with soft thunks, spearing right through the head and taking away lumps of jelly-like tissue. The Pitchfork turned its wounded head on Jan and with a heaving convulsion sprayed stomach acid over him.

The acid caught him on the side of his face and body; burning where it touched his skin, mixing with the rain and running down his back. Outrunning the creature had felt like an option at first, but Jan could no longer put pressure on his injured ankle and the thing was upon him. The Pitchfork’s mouth dilated open, revealing ribs of muscle and plates of hardened tissue. He staggered back. It approached almost cautiously, knowing it had him. Then Jan remembered the fish still clutched in his left hand.

He tossed the fish at the Pitchfork which, following some ancient and suicidal reflex, gulped it down. The effect was almost instantaneous. It fell thrashing to the floor, bloated and frothing at the mouth. Jan flashed a grimace at the dying Pitchfork before stepping gingerly over its twitching body and back towards the river. It took a while for the Pitchfork’s nervous system to realise that it was dead.

Chapter 2: Contingency

The vehicle they were to ride was a hovercraft. To Jan and his young daughter, Eva, it was magical. She clapped her hands in excitement and ran around the pressure skirt, arriving back at the other side and cannoning into Jan. He caught her shoulder before she fell over, but couldn’t prevent a grin from breaking out on his face.

‘How does it work?’ she asked, looking up excitedly. Eva’s eyes were wide, dark hair swept back with a bandana that had once belonged to her mother. She was wearing the best clothes Jan could find; a faded but clean t-shirt with an Arco logo and a pair of trousers with lots of pockets. In his mind she already looked like a trainee civil engineer.

‘I don’t know, but they’ll teach you all about it,’ Jan smiled indulgently.

A few of the children were alone but most had come with their parents. Jan recognised the faces; people from nearby villages, some of whom his own had fought with. Such conflicts now seemed childish; on the hovercraft they were all at the mercy of Arco. Ultimately, everyone was subject to Arco, either directly or through its various hydra-like branches. It was a constant, like the false life that threatened to throttle every settlement or the rains that fell each afternoon.

Eva, oblivious to all of that, walked to the front of the transport and started looking over the controls the two drivers were working at. She reached out a hand, stopping just short of pressing a glowing green button.

‘Eva, get back here,’ Jan hissed, eyeing the black-clad enforcers warily, but they didn’t seem to mind.

‘I can see the light inside,’ Eva said, an intent look on her face. ‘It’s electric.’

‘Don’t get in their way,’ Jan warned to no avail. She’d always loved machines, but beyond a few geared windmills and one old motorcycle engine there was little Jan could do for her. He’d had little schooling as a boy, and little to teach Eva when her time came. Jan didn’t want her to grow up as he’d done, so he’d endured the stares and the silent censure of his neighbours and explained what he could to Eva of engines and gears. And then, after months of begging, pleading and cajoling he’d agreed to enrol her at a school in the nearest conurbation.

The hovercraft slid away from the edge of the jungle, then accelerated smoothly down the river, engines roaring and coughing out thick fumes that obscured Jan’s vision. The air was warm and muggy, with heavy rainclouds squatting on the horizon, a sign of the coming torrential downpour.

The sky broke up; Jan’s view of Eva smiling at the passing scenery was replaced by other things. Events from years later. His home burning and helicopters screaming overhead.

Choking tear gas canisters streaked through the air, mingling with the smoke. He heard rifle fire, the crump of a grenade. Jan ran along the badly surfaced street; one hand gripping Eva’s forearm, the other fastened around the clammy metal of a revolver, held inexpertly. A row of grey shapes emerged from the smoke, visors lowered and riot shields held ready. Eva screamed and Jan pushed her aside, motioning for her to run. There was no time for last words.

Jan and the shields closed as he fired the pistol, rounds sloughing off of armour uselessly. He swung the butt of the pistol at a visor in desperation, but the blow never made it further. A baton caught Jan across the head and he collapsed to the ground, retching uncontrollably. He tried to scream for Eva one last time, but his traitorous body wouldn’t even allow that much. He couldn’t draw another breath.

Jan jerked awake, his head bursting with pain. The choking he’d felt in the dream didn’t abate; there was something inside his mouth, rubbery and cold. His arms and legs were bound tightly by what felt like plastic cords. His eyes opened to a dim purple light and he thrashed hard. The cords gave way slightly and Jan drew a ragged breath in through his nose. That gave him the strength to convulse until the restraints broke. He reached up with both hands, grasped whatever was covering his face, and tore it away.

Extracting himself from the creepers was easy enough, but Jan cursed himself for making such a simple mistake; he shouldn’t have been so clumsy about finding a place to sleep. Another couple of hours and he’d have become fertiliser. He sat, spluttering out greasy white and purple fragments, hoping he hadn’t swallowed any. It wasn’t all that surprising that he’d been careless when bedding down for the night. For once, he’d had a moment of unexpected good luck.

The hunger Jan had felt after the narrow escape from the Pitchfork had almost exhausted him completely – until he’d discovered an ancient cache of supplies lying amongst the tattered remains of a tent. The spherical, lurid green fruits he’d found were impossibly perfect; they grew on a symmetrical tree within the cache. The fruits were bulbous, ripe and strangely meaty, and the most delicious thing Jan had ever tasted. He recalled biting into the sweet flesh, feeling the juices run down his face.

Packing up the box was a minutes’ work. It somehow folded into itself, taking up much less space than should have been possible. Jan found he could lift it easily and he hoisted it onto his back alongside the pack. With one last look at the campsite he set off, moving silently through the jungle that steamed with the heat of the rising sun, its dappled rays almost blinding him as they spread through the mist.

Finding his way this deep within the jungle was difficult – Jan had long since left the lands he knew and there were very few landmarks.  The roads that penetrated this far were unsafe and the other wastelanders were best avoided. As Jan made his way along a crater rim, the thought suddenly struck him that he was dangerously close to forbidden territory, land that didn’t belong to him or his kind. On the other side of the half-kilometre wide rim, walled by centuries old impact glass, Jan spotted a high concrete wall topped with barbed wire. Not even Arco would dare to breach that barrier.

Jan had been moving for over an hour when he felt a vibration. He pressed his ear to the ground, hearing the rumble of an engine. It sounded powerful. Apprehension filled him; he wasn’t in the mood to meet Enforcers today. He scurried inside a collapsed building, hastily hiding in dense moss and pulling the cloak over himself. A few pale grey y-shaped worms fell softly from the wall; perfect miniatures of the Pitchfork.

A few minutes passed, with Jan barely daring to breathe as he heard the rumble of the engine grow louder. A figure dressed in drab combat fatigues passed by, then another, scouting ahead. Jan risked a glance, but from where he lay behind a low wall the source of the noise was still invisible. He spotted a row of trees fold up as if they’d been uprooted by a giant, and a small group of armed soldiers crashed through the jungle, walking directly towards his hiding spot.

Jan buried his head underneath the cloak again as the footsteps drew closer. He felt two boots plant themselves either side of his head. There was a momentary pause, and then the cloak was torn away with the tip of a bayoneted rifle. Jan stared mutely up into the face of a very young man, barely more than a teenager. Even in that moment of terror, something about the soldier struck Jan as out of place – it wasn’t just his age, it was the strange camouflage pattern he wore, not like any set of Arco fatigues. And the armband; in place of the ubiquitous delta symbol of Arco, there was a crude, hand-stitched emblem that looked like a sharp mountain or a predator’s tooth. The boy kept his rifle level and grinned, showing several missing teeth. Then he said something in a language Jan didn’t recognise, shouldered the rifle and walked back off to join the rest of his party. The rumble of the engines faded away.

Jan lay, trying to understand what he’d just seen. That war party wasn’t with Arco. If it were, he’d either be dead or handcuffed and on his way to a holding facility. He’d never seen anyone sporting that jagged mountain emblem before – they had to be insurrectionists.

By following a stream uphill, Jan was able to climb a little way above the oppressive mist, enough that the morning sun shone almost unimpeded. Squinting, he spotted the brown haze of smog that indicated a conurbation in the distance – it looked to be on his side of the horizon; he could be there by this evening. There was a column of smoke poking higher into the sky, as if a large segment of the city was on fire, and leading directly to it was a broad swathe of demolished trees – the result of whatever vehicle the strange army had used.

Jan wasn’t officially an outlaw, but only because he had no official status. He’d never accumulated so much as a single identity document to justify his existence. But, if he was looking to link up with a renegade army, that probably wouldn’t matter.

Jan sighed, leaning back against a tree and staring out at the misty rainforest. He didn’t know quite how that thought had come to him, but he knew where it would lead. An itch at the back of his mind was telling him ‘go to the conurbation’, and it looked as though his body had already decided to obey. Jan slid back down the rock face and started walking towards the distant column of smoke.

The crush outside the conurbation was unbelievable. To Jan it was almost unbearable. He’d walked straight out of the false jungle and into the overcrowded outskirts, still homing in on that tower of smoke. Bicycles and rickshaws competed for space with pedestrians, loud arguments breaking out by the minute. The dark, imposing pyramids of housing and holding facilities were seething with activity – crawling figures and flickering lights. The rooftops and walls were plated with the green and turquoise of thousands of high-density farms; most Conurbations were self-sufficient in food. Jan thought he heard shouts of protest; something about staple crops being shipped further north.

Jan continued to shove through the crowd, eliciting loud protests and a few threats as he tried to approach the fence guarding the interior. Eventually, he pushed his way into a more open space, his attention drawn by a burst of feedback from a loudspeaker. The crowd had buffeted him towards a public screen that displayed a gaunt-looking man with grey hair. A few moments of concentration and Jan had sounded out the letters underneath – ‘Ambassador Vash’. The speaker’s voice was clipped and had an accent Jan had never heard before – it sounded ancient and dry. Emotionless.

‘You have to disperse,’ Vash said, his voice calm and a little sinister. The man was dressed in a severe, neatly pressed grey uniform. An ominous note crept into his voice. ‘You are all in breach of the directives. You are placing yourself in harm's way.’ The man clearly didn’t understand the protesters; such was true of all those like him.

‘If you’ll just return to your homes, I promise that protest leaders can meet with our representatives to discuss terms - ’

Someone with a slingshot jeered and flung a rock, cracking the screen to general cheers from the crowd. As he tried harder to retreat, Jan noticed a jagged line drawing of a mountain scrawled underneath the broken screen; identical to the marking on the soldier’s armband. He was getting closer, though he couldn’t quite say to what.

The column of smoke Jan had spotted was rising some way in the distance, in the wired-off interior of the conurbation. Something about it seemed to draw him in. If he waited until nightfall it might be possible to sneak inside.

Jan found somewhere to barter the fruit tree he’d found, a provisions station that was doing a side trade forging identity papers. Slipping through the fence that guarded the interior of the conurbation, he walked closer to the rising column of smoke. The crowds within were more subdued, walking in ordered rows through grey streets or cycling down the centre on rusting old bikes and rickshaws. He spotted a few city workers hosing down another jagged mountain symbol daubed on a whitewashed wall. As he continued deeper into the conurbation, Jan became more and more conscious of just how out of place he seemed; it was becoming harder to explain just what he was doing here. It only took five minutes of fast walking to escape the cramped residential area and reach a disused industrial plant.

Suddenly, a white flash burst in the sky, shining harshly and illuminating the whole conurbation like an arc welder. The flash turned into a flickering line that divided the clouds in half and met the ground less than a mile away, just outside the conurbation’s boundary. Pressing himself up to a building, Jan felt the earthquake rumble and wash of heat as the falling star buried itself in the ground. A few people paused or shouted, turning to run away or towards the strike. A loudspeaker started ordering emergency workers to their stations. Jan merely picked himself up again and continued to walk. A strike on the protest wasn’t surprising; the crowd outside had grown large enough to seem threatening, even to eyes watching far above the sky.

Two more city blocks were sufficient to escape most of the crowd. Jan spotted a flight of helicopters overhead, moving quickly towards the site of the strike. He turned a final corner, the column of black smoke he’d spotted from miles away now easily visible. The big open plaza contained a heavy industrial warehouse; the blot in the sky Jan had spotted from far away wasn’t from a meteor strike or a battle but a working factory. His inner disappointment deepened – whatever he’d hoped to find wasn’t here.  He turned to leave and walked right into the barrel of a rifle. Behind it stood the white-uniformed body of an enforcer.

‘Papers!’ the guard snapped. Jan reached inside his coat as smoothly as he could and produced the forged documents. The enforcer scanned them quickly, frowning at Jan.

‘You’re not supposed to be here.’

‘Yeah, I know. Got scared by that meteor strike. Sorry,’ Jan replied. He didn’t think he sounded convincing. The enforcer’s frown turned into a cruel smile.

‘You weren’t a part of the protest, were you? What’s your name?’

Jan cringed inwardly, realising he hadn’t bothered to read the forged papers himself. He smiled weakly at the enforcer, letting the officer think he was in control, that he had power. Then, before the pause stretched too long, Jan drove a fist at the man’s windpipe. The enforcer coughed violently and fired, the shot glancing off the concrete pavement. Jan heard shouts from the street ahead and behind him and swung another fist at the enforcer’s head, feeling something crack. The man staggered and collapsed, dropping the rifle with a loud clatter.

Jan heard loud footsteps and reached behind his back for the dotbow, clicking back the bolt and walking quickly towards the warehouse, away from the tell-tale body of the enforcer. The footfalls grew louder and turned to shouts as more guards rounded the corner. Jan didn’t bother turning, he just ran for a small side door at the warehouse and yanked down the handle. It wouldn’t turn. He pulled again, frantically, and heard the crack of a bullet glancing off the pavement behind him.

‘Give it up, wastelander!’ an enforcer shouted.

Jan sighted along the dotbow, picking out the nearest light in the gloom, and released a bolt. A strangled gasp and the light skittered to the ground. Three more rounds glanced off the warehouse door, missing Jan entirely. He was still shrouded in night while they were easy to spot by their torches, but that advantage wouldn’t last. A sense of sick panic rose as Jan realized he had nowhere to run. Even if he was fast with the dotbow three enforcers presented impossible odds. He turned desperately to the door and yanked the handle one last time.

The door twisted inwards with unexpected force and Jan stared at the face of another armed man. A round glanced off the wall outside, the shouts of the guards growing louder. The man in front of Jan was mostly in shadow, but he spotted the same mountain emblem on a breast patch; it seemed more reassuring than sinister. The man raised the rifle and pointed it at Jan, moving so fast that he didn’t have the slightest chance to react.

Two shots echoed loudly as the stranger fired over Jan’s shoulder, deafening him. He raised both hands to his ears and staggered backwards, unable to hear anything over the ringing.

‘Thanks,’ he managed to say. ‘I’ve been looking for you.’

The stranger grinned back at Jan and smashed him over the head with the butt of the rifle.

Chapter 3: Complicity

'Imagine there's no countries

It isn't hard to do

Nothing to kill or die for

And no religion, too

Imagine all the people

Living life in peace...'

John Lennon

The rain spattered down into the gutters of Conurbation One, flooding the pothole-filled streets and running in rivulets off the corrugated iron and plastic roofs. A flash of lightning earthed itself on the spire of a radio antenna. Vash pulled up the collar of his overcoat and stepped aside from the wall of water as a tram skidded its way along the road, the contacts sparking overhead.

Vash was unremarkable amongst the dozens of other people crossing the plaza. He was tall and thin, grey hair, sallow eyes set in a worn face, lines of worry etched deep by far too much experience. An observer would have guessed Vash’s age at mid-fifties. They would have been wrong.

Cursing silently as the rain soaked its way through his clothes, Vash climbed the steps by the steep road that led to the Hollow Tower, the historic headquarters of Arco; the sole government of Earth. The tower was tall and ancient, perched atop a hill that overlooked a huge flooded valley. The surrounding mountains were terraced, jammed with conurbations and slums that spilled out onto floating platforms. The cramped plots of urban subsistence farms cluttering every available surface only added to the sense of decay.

A couple of guards ushered him the final hundred metres, past a few dozen protesters.

The atrium at the heart of the tower was a little more sheltered. Bright lights shone into the open space, throwing the milling sea of Arco administrators and Enforcers into hard relief. The background level of noise was a little above its usual subdued level, the movement more purposeful. Vash knew the rhythms of this place well enough to sense the agitation. He could just about hear the gathering crowd outside, a subdued rumble, like distant breakers. He groaned inwardly at the thought of more food riots – the unrest that had started in Conurbation Fifteen must have spread.

Above the bureaucrats, clerks and functionaries towered a colossal Rodinesque statue of a man – where once it had looked hopefully towards the future, it now stared blindly at the baleful sky, any facial features long since corroded away. Its raised right arm was an accusing stump, snapped off at the elbow, the left missing entirely from the shoulder down.

From where Vash stood, the statue was framed by the red and bronze delta symbol of Arco, painted large on the curving internal wall. And above that, stretching into the sky, were row upon row of offices looking down into the central space. Walking quickly, he entered the lift on the opposite side of the Hollow Tower.

The lift door slid open, revealing the corpulent form of Meyer, the Director of Conurbation One, surrounded by a gaggle of lesser figures and a few staff officers in neat grey uniforms.

‘Good of you to come sir,’ Meyer said gruffly, blocking Vash’s attempt to step past him. ‘How was the holiday?’

‘Busy,’ Vash said, ignoring the jab. ‘Britain isn’t what it used to be.’

‘I suppose you’d know,’ Meyer replied, grinning.

Vash merely shot Meyer a glare and continued to walk down the corridor to his office. He’d deposed the senior Meyer decades ago, and, like a piece of rubbish that stubbornly floated to the surface, the man’s son had risen through the ranks to direct Conurbation One. The younger Meyer was a vain, greedy self-serving man like most of his predecessors. Vash had no choice but to cooperate with him, if the opposite meant even more instability.

‘We’ve been busy while you were away,’ Meyer continued, as if he hadn’t noticed Vash’s distracted pause. ‘There’s a crowd of bloody idiots outside, complaining about something or other. I’ve ordered the Enforcers out - '

‘No,’ Vash said, softly. ‘Order them back and tell them not to fire a single shot. Go down to the barracks now and issue the countermand.’

‘Whatever,’ Meyer shrugged. ‘Frankly, I don’t know why you bother trying to reason with them. No-one down there can stand the sight of you.’

Vash turned the corner towards his office without another word, hearing Meyer’s heavy footsteps as he walked back down the corridor. Vash checked his watch – if he was quick he had time to review things before making a decision about the protesters.

Vash’s office was roomy but Spartan, mostly taken up with filing cabinets and the rollaway bed he’d had brought up for the frequent nights when there wasn’t time to return to his apartment. Almost a quarter of the space beneath the big picture window was taken up by the memory machine, a machine so primitive that in the original draft of human technological development, integrated circuits had been invented before something so cumbersome became practical to build.

The device was a huge semi-analogue computer that presented him with important information and allowed him to issue reports. Vash perused the most important news. There was a spreading famine in Conurbation Sixty-Seven, the largest on the American west coast; the irrigation system had failed after they’d neglected to replace the generator. News had just arrived of a raid on Conurbation Fifteen and an automatic barge had sunk during a supply run in the Indian Ocean. Construction of the planet’s five hundredth holding facility in the Alps was on schedule but almost five times over its resource budget. It would have been overwhelming, had it not been normal.

Vash wearily picked up the phone and issued a few orders, prioritising the famine and suggesting the rations for North America to be reduced in the meantime. The director there might not listen to him but he had to do what he could.

He heard a knock at his office door and ignored it, turning his attention to the barge. It had been carrying a huge load of vital antibiotics which couldn’t easily be replaced. It might be possible to cut further into the reserves for South Asia before another cholera epidemic. The knock persisted and reluctantly Vash looked away from the machine.

‘Enter!’

‘Ambassador, I need a moment of your time.’

His aide, Corbin, a veteran Enforcer, slid the door open quietly and stepped inside. The man might have been handsome in a more plentiful time; his face was angular like some ancient Futurist portrait. Vash turned back to the memory machine, keying in another set of orders, motioning for Corbin to continue talking.

‘It’s the crowd outside, sir. The Enforcers are standing by for now but I can just tell something’s about to snap.’

‘Meyer told me. I can't prioritise it right now,’ Vash mumbled, turned back to a stack of paperwork. When Corbin moved it aside, he became still more irritable. The aide hesitated, withdrawing his hand, apologetic.

‘There are at least two new worrying developments just since I left,’ Vash snapped. ‘Have you heard about the famine and the strike on Conurbation Fifteen? Both have already killed hundreds of people, hundreds of my people, and each hour they don’t get resolved, more people die. The value of my time is measured in lives. Do you think this riot matters more just because it is outside my window?’

‘Ambassador,’ Corbin shuffled uncomfortably. ‘I wouldn’t trouble you about anything less than an emergency.’

‘Why do you always call me ‘ambassador’, such a noble honorific for someone whose real job is to take the blame for the misbehaviour of this whole miserable planet. I'm a whipping post, not an ambassador -’ Vash trailed off, exasperation getting the better of him. He turned his chair towards Corbin.

‘Perhaps you’re both, sir,’ Corbin smiled faintly. Vash closed his eyes for a moment, breathed in and flicked the switch on the memory machine, hearing the dull whir as the device powered down.

Corbin turned and walked back out of the door and, heart sinking, Vash realised he had started to follow. As soon as they walked back into the corridor the noise of the crowd became audible again.

‘We believe they organised via the provisions centres and the like,’ Corbin said as they walked together. ‘A lot of them are returning from that disaster in Conurbation Fifteen; the orbital strike, and some of them are armed, see this -’ He thrust a film cassette at Vash. ‘Footage from the last hour,’ Corbin removed a player from the folds of his clothing with a flourish and inserted the recording.

On the small, hazed screen, Vash could make out the view from a helicopter of an enormous and angry crowd which had gathered throughout Conurbation One, mainly in the old city, packing the plaza in front of the Hollow Tower so tightly that it was impossible to move more than a foot in any direction. Still more were streaming in, cramming through the jammed exits.

‘It’s built up so quickly…’

‘And there are more arriving all the time. Meyer tightening the curfew rules was the real tipping point. I think the phrase he used was 'tough love'.’

‘I doubt he can even imagine what it’s like to go hungry.’

‘I’m sure I could never be heard expressing such an opinion about a superior,’ Corbin demurred.

Vash heard the crowd before he saw it; the roar grew to a crescendo when he stepped onto a balcony jutting out high above the tower’s open interior. He was greeted with a rock that smashed against the recently installed glass hood. The circular plaza containing the worn statue was thronged with people.

‘It’s the usual grievances; they all feel like they’re being treated as prisoners, they want the food rations increased and for us to stop bulldozing their homes every time a claim is laid. Your name has been mentioned a few times.’

Vash stared down at the mob. The dulled light of a grey afternoon made it difficult to pick out any faces and the crowd appeared to be a single cohesive mass; one vast, stupid, aggressive animal. No, that was how men like Meyer saw them. The people down there were human, no different from him but for a trick of fate.

‘What have you tried so far?’

Vash squinted down from the balcony, making out a few lines of riot-shielded troops at the fringes of the crowd. On his orders, their rifles were shouldered, but he watched one Enforcer take a swing at a rioter with his truncheon.

‘Most of the local Enforcers are tied up containing copycat riots and looting in the outskirts,’ Corbin continued. ‘We sent in a riot squad, threw a few fear-gas grenades into the crowd. Nothing works – they seem very determined. I think it was us destroying that statue that set it off.'

'What statue?'

'The Redeemer. It must have been pretty much the last physical connection we had to our past. And we smashed it to fragments with plastic explosives.'

'We had to destroy it, there was no choice,' Vash said but Corbin cut him off.

‘Couldn’t we just give them what they’re asking for – it's hardly unreasonable? Is it so much to ask to let people keep the tiniest bit of pride, to feel like a real society and not an enormous prison camp?'

‘Don’t delude yourself, Corbin, this isn’t a real society. We can’t disobey an order from those above, no matter how hard we rage at the sky it won’t change anything,’ Vash was cut off by another rock. He watched as Enforcers pushed into the mob to seize the offender.

‘Why not try and explain the situation to them?’ Corbin suggested. The crowd was densely packed and had spread down the road that led to the sea platforms and blocks of Conurbation One. The Enforcers had barricaded the lower levels of the tower, keeping its base clear. Shouts of ‘String up the puppet’ echoed up at Vash, but he felt nothing in particular. Being hated by most of the planet had been a living nightmare for the first few years, but now he was used to it.

‘I suppose it's worth a try,’ said Vash without much enthusiasm. ‘I'll talk to the crowd. After all, from the sound of their slogans, it's me they want.’ Vash moved towards the microphone and Corbin stepped respectfully aside.

‘This is Vash; for your own safety I need you to disperse,’ his voice echoed around the Hollow Tower, the voice of a man in control, a man above the rest. It was all a façade, but practiced to the point of perfection.

The crowd went quiet for a moment, then started shouting all at once. Vash saw a few children and teenagers crying or screaming at him, willing the author of all their pain to die. He saw a crying mother. Perhaps she’d lost a son to the holding facilities. An angry man with a limp pushed closer, shouting something about his home being demolished. These details were repeated a thousand times over, until all of it was subsumed in the universal roar of the crowd.

‘You have to disperse,’ Vash said calmly. He’d expected nothing less of this mob, of course. ‘We all know why. We have only just witnessed the indiscriminate retaliation that those above are capable of. What happened at Fifteen was a tragedy. Desist, and we will open a dialogue to address your concerns.’

‘Liar!’ someone screamed, to general assent. ‘You’re just trying to save your own skin!’

‘We’ll take you down with us!'

'String up the puppet!' The cry spread throughout the mob, thousands of people chanting in unison.

Vash’s lips curved downward. The mob were content to shoot the messenger, if that was all they could get their hands on. Over the years he had developed an instinct for these things. He knew that in its current state the crowd couldn’t be reasoned with. He needed to let it burn itself out.

Vash turned to leave, and saw Corbin in conversation with a clerk Vash didn’t recognise. The clerk hurried away. Corbin’s face was drained of colour.

‘What is it?’ demanded Vash.

‘A message from orbit. Sir, if…’ Corbin seemed to have trouble speaking. He paused and cleared his throat. ‘If we don’t disperse the crowd within the next half an hour, they’re dropping a meteor. On all of us. The whole Conurbation.’

'Are they still on radio?' Vash snapped, feeling his own stomach clench in fear.

'Yes, sir.'

'Then tell the operator to route the signal to my office and put up all the usual seals. And for eternity’s sake, tell the crowd what you just told me. If that doesn’t clear them out, nothing will.’

‘They won’t believe us,’ Corbin said, dead-eyed. ‘You heard them; they all think we’re just trying to save ourselves. Hell, there's rumours circulating that we're the ones ordering the strikes.’

‘Make them believe it,’ Vash said. ‘We have to.’

Vash left the balcony as Corbin began to explain the situation to the angry crowd, walking quickly back down to the office. He could hear his aide pleading, explaining that everyone in the city would die if they didn’t leave. Vash knew it would achieve nothing.

In minutes, Vash had reached his office, walking toward the severe desk of his memory machine, trying to ignore the incessant clattering as relays switched back and forth. He picked up the slim black telephone, feeling every sense magnified in anticipation, and tried to compose himself. Whatever came next, he would face it with dignity. He hadn’t done anything wrong. He was doing all he could. Even they had to see that.

Vash ruled the world. He was the most powerful man on Earth, but despite that he was nothing more than a conduit. They had a name, those who ruled his planet, but the ordinary people of Earth wouldn’t speak it. The voice on the other end of the phone was soft and feminine, but off somehow, as though it didn't really understand the sounds it was making.

‘Good morning, Vash.’

'I understand that you intend to destroy Conurbation One unless I can disperse the rioting crowd outside. I ask you for more time to clear the crowd,’ Vash would not beg, not even now.

'Do you bow your head when you speak to me Vash? Do you kneel?'

'What? No, I -' Vash blurted, thrown by the question.

'Why not? The others always knelt when they spoke to me.'

'What would it mean to you if I did?’ Vash said, biting down on an outburst of anger. ‘The others don’t understand, they treat you like an emperor. What would my submission mean to you?'

‘Interesting,’ the voice said, leaving a lengthening gap of silence.

‘The crowd outside is no possible threat either to Arco or to you. There is no reason to involve yourself. Can’t you see that?’

‘Why did they care so much about the statue you destroyed? It was just a piece of stone, carved to look like a human, yet its destruction is what motivated the riot. I do not understand, but I want to.’

‘It was a symbol, of culture, and religion. It was a connection to their past, to our past. Of course they’d care about it,’ Vash said bitterly. 'I must ask for more time to clear the crowd before you resort to -'

‘It was rock carved to look like a person. Why sacrifice your life for that? It doesn’t make sense.’

'Listen to me, stop these games! There are thousands of people out there! Why do they have to die? Why does everyone else in the city have to die, just because they are at the gates?’

‘Consider the possible interactions. The number of possible unique person to person exchanges increases with the square of the crowd size. People know that the others know that they know what they know, and so on to infinity. Mutual knowledge cascades, with no unifying impulse. I do not know what will happen, what knowledge will be generated, what decisions made, if such a process is allowed to run to completion. Unpredictability is inevitable when there is no synchrony between individuals. This process must halt.’

'I just need a few hours, just enough time to resolve this without bloodshed! You've told me before you don't wish to kill needlessly.'

'This is true, we do not want to kill needlessly, but hives cannot be allowed to exist.  They collude and cooperate. They are a danger to us all.'

'Hives? They're just people, frightened people!'

'Forty-five minutes,’ the line went dead.

Vash slumped against the desk, dropping the telephone to the floor with a clatter. He pressed hard against his temples, trying to focus, to gain some element of clear vision that had eluded him until now. He forced down the useless animal panic as his mind raced to set up the problem.

Why did those above fear humans in large groups so much? Vash didn’t know, and whenever they tried to explain the answer was incomprehensible. There was nothing he could say that would erase their fears, so he had to try and work around the constraint. A renewed appeal to the crowd outside wouldn’t work, and if Corbin was to be believed they’d already tried everything nonlethal. Riot control operations worked only when troops were disciplined and not too heavily outnumbered; lethal operations were comparatively easy. ‘Lethal operations’ - what an elegant euphemism for mass murder. Reserves from Conurbation Two could be here in forty - useless. Think of a solution – there had to be some clever way out of this. Surely? He didn’t want their blood on his hands, his hands were tied – they had forced his hand. A faint rumble reached Vash’s ears from outside – the crump of an improvised bomb. People were already dying, then.

The world played an unfair game. It didn’t scale its challenges to the ability of the players. How was a twelfth century peasant supposed to discover a cure for the bubonic plague, or a sixteenth century Inca defend himself against gunfire and steel swords? Even so, you had to assume the problem was solvable. That was the only way to carry on.

In the centre of the chaos stood a bulky screen, dead apart from a luminous green countdown. Only twenty minutes. Was it worth making another appeal to the crowd? No, there was no time for that, and they already knew about the threat. Maybe they had simply ceased to care whether they lived or died. Well, they had no right to make that decision for the other twenty million people who lived in this conurbation. Many of them would wish to live, he was sure.

Vash needed to act soon or else there wouldn’t be time. He stood and moved to the window that looked out over the occupied plaza below and then on to the sea, walled by endless grey towers. The faces in the crowd blurred together, one mass of certain resolve. The phone rang again and Vash dashed over and snatched it up without thinking. The voice on the other end was Meyer’s.

‘Corbin’s just told me about the ultimatum.  Can’t be helped, I suppose. But it’s not too late for me to…countermand that countermand. I can have that crowd out of that plaza in no time, one way or another.’

‘I don’t doubt it,’ Vash said. ‘How many would die, hundreds?’

‘That’s the way it is,’ Meyer said. ‘I’ll do it nice and humane.’

‘No you won’t,’ Vash said. Meyer laughed. He actually laughed, and Vash just imagined the bastard nodding on the other end of the line. His ‘special’ squads of Enforcers readying their weapons, itching for a fight against a defenceless enemy. Vash’s fingers whitened around the phone. The timer said fifteen minutes; no more hesitation, then. If there had been another way out, he had no time to implement it. Vash swallowed a rising tide of anger and spoke.

‘Do whatever’s necessary to disperse the crowd and make it quick.’

‘Yes... sir.’

Vash slammed the phone down on his desk, but he didn’t fold up, didn’t even sit down again. His place was outside, watching Meyer’s Enforcers. He walked quickly out of the room, back out into the corridor and then outside. He flinched only a little as the screams started, mixed with the chatter of gunfire.

Chapter 4: Revolution

'Whatever happened to

Dear old Lenny?

The great Elmyra,

And Sancho Panza?

Whatever happened to the heroes?

Whatever happened to the heroes?'

The Stranglers

His head was throbbing and Jan could taste blood in his mouth.

‘We should have just shot the bastard in the first place,’ a male voice said. ‘Easier all round. The wastelander’s only gonna be trouble.’

Jan opened his eyes, squinting in the harsh sodium light. He tried to raise his hands to block the glare, but he couldn’t; they were tied behind his back.

‘How do you know he’s a wastelander?’ said another voice, a woman’s. It was coming from almost directly behind him.

‘Oh, come on Tuva. Some random looking like he’s just crawled out the jungle wanders into town, pisses off a squad of Enforcers and leads them right to our door. Who else is it gonna be, a bloody accountant? He’s either a liability or it was a set up and he’s working for Arco. Either way we should just get rid of him.’

Slowly his eyes adjusted to the glare. It wasn’t possible to make out much of the room - he was sat facing one wall - but it seemed big given the way their voices carried. That same mountain, stencilled on the wall in front of him. Except that the more he looked at it the less it looked like a mountain. There was something too purposeful about the slight curvature, its serrated edges too regular.

‘You’re not thinking straight. Why would Arco bother with the whole chase and a shootout shtick? If they knew where we were we’d have been infiltrated already. And whoever he is the guy took out two of them with a dotbow. He could be useful.’

‘Please,’ the first voice sneered. The man walked into the corner of Jan’s vision and shook him roughly by the shoulder. He felt the cold metal of a knife against his neck. ‘You a wastelander? Just nod; say one word and I’ll cut you.’

Jan nodded, sweat prickling his forehead.

‘You’re not working for Arco?’ his captor hissed. He was a big man, well-muscled by a lifetime of hard labour.

Jan shook his head, though he didn’t expect it to make much of a difference. He’d been in similar situations before, and the only thing to do was to watch for opportunities and stay capable of taking them.

‘Oh, leave it Pao,’ said the woman’s voice. ‘What kind of interrogation is that?’

‘You hot for him or something Tuva? Like a bit of rough?’ goaded Pao.

She laughed.

‘Seriously though, think about it. We keep him around we’re gonna have to spend every minute of every day watching him. Do you want that? We do it careful and the boss doesn’t even have to know – we use one of the Arco standard rifles we can make it look like he died from an earlier injury.’

‘I suppose…’ Tuva trailed off, as though she was considering the proposition. Jan tensed, looking at Pao out of the corner of his eye and wondering if he might be able to headbutt the man.

‘What do you suppose?’ came a new voice and the sound of a door swinging open. ‘Come now, this isn’t any way to treat a guest. Untie him.’

‘He’s not a bloody pet. We should find out what he knows and - ’

‘Untie him, Pao,’ the third voice repeated and Jan felt the ties cut as Pao stepped behind him. ‘Help him up, you two. Gently!’ The guards gripped Jan and lifted him into a standing position, sending shooting pains through his aching muscles, turning him to face the source of the new voice.

The man was tall and dressed in mismatched camo only slightly less patched and shabby than that of the others. A large bandolier, empty as far as Jan could make out, was slung over their shoulder, and a beret set at a jaunty angle sat on a thick shock of curly black hair. Jan was surprised by how young they all looked. Barely older than Eva.

‘I am Christo and this is the Revolution,’ he said, gesturing to the two others with a grandiose sweep of his arm. Jan suppressed a mad urge to laugh.

‘You’re going to bring down Arco; all three of you?’

‘Ha, no,’ Christo laughed. ‘What would the point of that be?’

Jan stared at him in utter confusion. ‘So you’re just bandits?’ Christo’s lips twisted down faintly.

‘I suppose you think Arco is the source of all your woes?’

‘My what?’

‘You blame Arco for all this,’ Christo swept his arm again, as if to indicate the world in general. Jan nodded.

‘Do you not wonder why Arco exists? Why our ambassador merely delivers the demands of those above, never negotiating? Why the false life spreads, never retreating? The answers are obvious if you think to ask the right questions.’

‘Christo, what the hell are you playing at?’ said Tuva. ‘We shouldn’t be telling him anything.’

‘This man will know his way around the jungle,’ Christo replied. He turned to Jan. ‘You’ve seen the reservations before right?’

Jan nodded, trying to ignore a growing sense of unease, just keeping his options open.

‘Of course he has,’ Tuva replied patiently, as if she was explaining something to a child. ‘Which is why we make him tell us the route, then leave him here. If the information’s good then maybe we’ll have a reason to trust him.’

‘And how would you make him Tuva?’ Christo asked, a hard edge creeping into his voice. ‘Hurt him until he cooperates? I don’t think so.’

‘Christo, you’re making a - ’ Tuva began, but Christo made a cutting gesture and she trailed off sullenly. He grinned suddenly, the tension dissipating.

‘I’m not interested in coercion. Jan is not going to join us because he’s made to. Jan is going to join us because he will want to. And besides,’ he grinned, spreading his arms, ‘That’s not what the heroes do!’

Christo watched Jan expectantly, meeting his gaze.

‘So if you don’t want to bring down Arco, then who?’ asked Jan hesitantly. He thought of Eva, of his frantic, hopeless fight against the Enforcers on that terrible day. ‘Why not Arco?’

‘Now those, those are the right questions. And isn’t the answer obvious? Who cares who rules the world when they own it?’ asked Christo. He pointed an accusing finger at the sky. ‘We’re bringing them down.’

Like a fool, Jan actually glanced up at the warehouse ceiling. Then he realised what Christo meant and could no longer help himself. He folded up, laughing hysterically.

‘You might as well try and bring down the sky,’ Jan said, trying to control himself. After everything he’d been through it was almost a relief to realise that they were all just crazy. ‘And I suppose you want me to help?’

‘You’ve got it,’ Christo winked, making a gun shape with his index finger and thumb, pointing it up at the roof and miming pulling a trigger. But something about his affect was deadly serious. ‘We’re going to tear them from the sky and end this nightmare.’

Jan’s laughter died in his throat. He searched for something to say.

‘What do you need me for?’

‘I need you to lead us back into the jungle, to a reservation. We’re going to meet the Dyn.’

Chapter 5: Justice

Vash and Corbin sat in the office, sleep-deprived and dejected. Mechanical sounds amplified the silence between them, the constant quiet whirring and clicking of the memory machine, the hum of the air-conditioning unit. Both sipped their coffee and waited for the other to speak. Vash crushed another tab of Integrity and stirred it into his cup, ignoring Corbin’s sideways glance.

In the long hours before sleep had finally claimed him Vash had picked over the day’s events in his mind, untangling failures from honest mistakes, looking for policies he could pursue to prevent it from happening again. Tormenting himself with how events might have played out had he done something differently.

‘It was a bluff,’ he said into the emptiness.

‘What?’

‘The Dyn, the voice on the phone, it was bluffing.’ Vash turned to look out the window, but his gaze got lost somewhere in the middle distance. ‘I’m almost certain of it.’

‘Why didn’t you call it?’ Corbin asked. ‘You should have called it.’ There was an edge of anger in his voice.

‘Perhaps I should have,’ Vash replied, his mind still elsewhere. Then he turned to Corbin.‘But I didn’t say I was certain. Even if I thought there was a ninety-nine per cent chance it was a bluff that wouldn’t have justified me gambling with the lives of millions.’

There was something different about Corbin - something Vash hadn’t seen before.

‘I’d have taken those odds. If you back down whenever they threaten us that will just make them threaten us more. You have to show resolve against an incredible threat or they’ll never stop. You have to show strength.’

‘The threat was credible - you just have to look at the statistics. No orbital strikes against civilian population centres for almost a century, and then the rate starts to gradually creep up over the last dozen years. There was one on the outskirts of Fifteen a matter of days ago. Things are falling apart, and the Dyn are reacting the only way they know how. It isn’t a strategy or a power play, it's just the sort of thing the Dyn do. They see ants swarming below them and stamp.’

‘Why would you suspect them of bluffing?’

Vash stood and walked over to the window, as though to take in the whole of Conurbation One. He watched Corbin in the reflection.

‘Because it doesn’t make any sense,’ he explained. ‘We don’t understand them, not with any certainty, but they are not irrational. The Dyn know the chaos a strike on the Hollow Tower would cause. They know that given time we have the facilities to disperse the crowds.’

After a pause, Corbin nodded, and whatever Vash thought he had seen slipped back beneath the surface.

‘Then why bluff?’

Vash shook his head, lost in thought again. ‘There was something different about the voice, Corbin. It was more… Eloquent. Engaged. Something has changed.’

Another silence stretched between them. Corbin finished his coffee and placed the cup down on the desk with a sense of finality.

‘What’s next on the agenda?’ he asked breezily.

‘I’m resigning. Tomorrow morning. Over a hundred people died on my orders yesterday. My role will go to someone less compromised. To you.’

A flicker crossed Corbin’s face; Vash knew he would find the offer hard to resist.

‘You’re testing me, aren’t you?’ Corbin laughed. ‘I’m a glorified Enforcer.’

Vash took another slow sip of his coffee.

‘I was nobody, Corbin. I was only ever important because of blind luck. I never chose this. There’s no reason you couldn’t take my place.’

‘You know better than I do the Dyn would never accept that. To them our roles aren’t interchangeable - as far as they’re concerned you are the ambassador.’

‘They could come to accept a new ambassador in time.’

‘Vash, with all due respect, you’re a brilliant bureaucrat but a terrible politician,’ Corbin laughed. ‘What would your resignation achieve? Would it salve your conscience? Arco is not accountable - you’re not constrained by the laws that govern other men. What do you think would happen if all of us working for the greater good resigned whenever we had to make a hard decision? The only people left would be the Meyers of this world. Besides, it’s not as though you haven’t had to make such decisions before.’

‘I’m not doing it for my conscience,’ Vash said, well aware of Corbin’s sceptical expression. ‘This time it was different. I’ve learnt to live with the resentment of twenty-two billion people. But I don’t give the orders, remember? I’m a messenger. If the Directors see me as more than that all hell will break loose.’

‘Well,’ Corbin said, brightening up. A thin smile crept across his face. ‘One step ahead of you. I think I may have a solution - a way to regain your credibility and solve a few… pressing institutional problems in one swoop.’

‘Really?’ Vash said. ‘Go on.’

Vash started when Corbin explained the scheme. The whole plan made him feel distinctly uncomfortable; it might be expedient but it was wrong.

‘No,’ Vash said, after a moment’s thought.

‘Ah,’ Corbin replied, eyes darting downward. ‘I was hoping you wouldn’t say that. Although I suspected you might...’

‘What have you done?’

‘The plan’s already set in motion. You’ll give the speech tomorrow morning.’

Vash lay quite still in his bed, staring at a patch of damp on the plaster of the ceiling above while he allowed the sweat on his brow to dry. The grey light of another dreary dawn seeped in through the slatted blinds. A watch ticked from the side table. He slowly folded back the starched white sheets and walked over to the room’s small chipped basin, splashing some cold water onto his face.

He'd considered dressing down Corbin, demanding he reverse the scheme he’d constructed. The man held no authority over him in these matters and to go behind his back... But he knew Corbin was right. His petty personal concerns and even the lives of hundreds; ultimately none of it mattered when compared to his responsibility to the billions of people across the Earth.

He dressed slowly and precisely in a clean suit, fastened the watch around his wrist and dropped another tab of Integrity into his coffee, then left his meagre apartment, shrugging on his overcoat on the way out. At the bottom of his apartment block, a sleek Arco hydrogen-steam car awaited him. The journey to Conurbation One’s administrative compound passed in a blur of detachment, as though there was more than a pane of bulletproof glass between Vash and the world outside. The grey stacks of mass-produced housecubes and looming pyramidal arcologies slid by; civilian traffic parting ahead of the motorcade. Enforcers waved them inside, and the car came to a halt, an aide opening the door for him. Even now this kind of treatment made Vash uncomfortable, but it was what people expected.

Vash strode through the sprawling compound, proceeding to an open plaza hemmed in on all sides by the imposing concrete facades of the various government departments. Corbin and a dozen or so of the more important officials were already waiting for him, along with a few hundred Enforcers. They all saluted smartly and stood rigid, staring forward as though to avoid his gaze. A light drizzle hazed the air. Vash purposefully climbed the steps to the low podium and strode towards the lectern at its centre. He gently set his watch down, pausing to gather his thoughts. Stillness fell over the square, descending with the cold rain and in that silence every nervous twitch and clenched hand screamed guilt. Vash could read it scrawled across their faces. He just hoped it didn’t show on his own.

Corbin stood next to him, turned slightly and nodded. Vash didn’t return the gesture. He cleared his throat.

‘You all know why you’re here,’ Vash said, trying to sound assured. There was no microphone but nevertheless his voice carried in the enclosed space.

‘Sometimes, in our role as intermediaries between the Dyn and those we govern, we are forced to do things that might make us sleep less easily. We have erased our own history. We have driven entire communities from their homes. We have waged war against those that would risk the lives of millions in the pursuit of power or some futile ideal. But murder? Murder is something quite different; we are protectors of life, though many in the wider world will never truly understand what that means. None of us can be above the laws that we would govern by, for little else stands between us and the spectre of tyranny. The man responsible for the massacre yesterday will be held accountable.’

A party of Enforcers walked up the centre of the formation, shoving ahead a dejected, handcuffed Meyer, his usual ostentatious finery replaced by a grey coverall. Vash stepped aside as the Enforcers pushed Meyer to the top of the platform.

‘I took the initiative, I acted without authorisation and… and I was wrong to do so,’ Meyer said, checking a note, his voice low and defeated.

‘Speak up,’ prompted one of the Enforcers, gripping the man's shoulder a little tighter than necessary. Meyer hesitated, then continued louder.

‘I have failed in my duties as a public servant and in recognition of this I relinquish my office so that I may serve the prison term deemed befitting of my crimes,’ he finished. Vash saw the hot glare of resentment in his eyes, the loathing that almost made him flinch away. But worst of all was the recognition.

You’re no different from any of us after all, it seemed to say.

He paused for a moment, looking back at the scrupulously blank faces as Meyer was led quietly away.

‘Corbin will be assigned as acting Director of Conurbation One, in addition to his other duties. He has asked me to notify you that his first act as Director will be to launch a full inquiry in due course so as to ensure such a tragedy does not happen again.’

Corbin smiled, nodded to the crowd in acknowledgement, taking it in stride despite total lack of forewarning. The crowd began to break up, subdued.

‘That went as smoothly as it could have done,’ Corbin said as they stepped down from the podium. Vash frowned at Corbin as the two men walked back towards the waiting car. ‘Don’t give me that look, sir! He’ll be treated better than most; far better than he deserves.’

‘I’m not comfortable with this. I mean, the hypocrisy of that speech alone! He was following my orders...’ Vash trailed off.

‘Technically you don’t give orders sir, you merely relay the wishes of those above. Meyer was all too willing to let his goon-squad loose and that’s hardly the first of his crimes.’ As they neared the car Corbin stopped, clapped him on his shoulder. ‘Vash, what’s done is done. This is for the best. Oh, and thanks for the Directorship. I’ve always wanted to try my hand at administration.’

An aide was running towards them.

‘It wasn’t a favour,’ Vash said, smiling at last. ‘Don’t be surprised if there’s a great deal of rot to clear out now that Meyer’s gone.’

The aide finally reached Vash, red-faced and out of breath. Corbin melted away, eager to get acquainted with his new role.

‘Sir, there’s a call for you!’ he panted, struggling to get the words out.

Vash walked briskly over to the car and picked up the handset. The neutral voice of Earth’s true ruler was a little tinny, but unmistakable. His gut congealed.

‘Ambassador, you are required for conference. You will be delivered to the Ascensor immediately.’

Chapter 6: Contact

As the sun set, the Other Moon rose. When Jan was very young his mother had said that if the Other Moon and a full moon were both visible in the sky, bad luck would befall him. When he was a little older he’d had the wit to wonder just how anyone could know that and soon after he'd abandoned any belief in portents or omens. At least, he thought he had. Right now, the tale seemed all too plausible. The electric blue spark, as bright as any of the larger satellites, glared at Jan like a malevolent glint in some world-spanning eye.

‘Thing is, the Other Moon actually is bad news,’ said Christo conversationally, following behind. ‘In every story there are seeds of truth.’

‘How’s that?’ Jan said.

‘It’s where those above came from. They say one day that thing just lit up in the sky, though it might have been hidden up there for thousands of years. Then it opened up like a great mouth and out poured the Dyn.’

Jan shuddered slightly at that name, so rarely spoken among his people. Perhaps he wasn't above superstition after all. The Other Moon seemed closer when he glanced back up; it still seemed wrong. It was too blue and too bright to be a star or a planet and always shadowed the true moon at a fixed angle, stalking it across the sky.

They continued onwards in silence for several minutes, passing the ruin Jan had hidden in a couple of days ago. Suddenly the jungle came to an abrupt halt. Jan put his hand out, motioning for Christo to stop.

'What is it?' whispered Christo, inching forwards to see for himself.

A swathe of devastation cut across the jungle ahead of them, dozens of metres wide, running in a near-straight line as far as they could see in either direction. The false plants had been uprooted, crushed and torched. Salt had been spread over them, causing those that might have moved into the clearing to retreat. Jan remembered that terrible, half-glimpsed machine uprooting trees. He paused at the edge of the track.

'I saw a patrol near here on my way to the Conurbation,' he said, turning to Christo. 'They wore your insignia.'

'Ah, of course. Arco's laying a new road. I sought out people on the patrols that might be won over to the cause. Aurelie tells me the reservation is in this region and I thought it was our best hope. But they never found anything. Without access to an aircraft or satellites you could spend months searching this one miserable patch of jungle.'

Aurelie - Christo's informant? Now didn't seem like the time to ask. Satisfied that the path was clear, Jan ran for the cover of the opposite side. Christo followed.

'Your people came very close,’ he said. ‘The crater's not far now.'

They reached the rim an hour later, hunkering behind a rocky outcrop. The false jungle fell away before them, the crater opening up to give a vantage point from which they could see the concrete wall of the reservation roughly a mile away. A rough dirt track wound its way down the steep incline and towards the wall.

‘That’s what you’re looking for, isn’t it? You going to tell me how this all fits into your plan?’ Jan said, gesturing at the wall.

'In time, my friend.' Christo passed him some binoculars. 'They see in infrared,' he offered.

The word meant nothing to Jan, but when he raised the binoculars he spotted tiny pinpricks of light moving along the wall.

'I count nine guards on this stretch. Do you see the same?'

Jan nodded.

'Less than I anticipated - we might just pull this off,' Christo laughed, sounding relieved.

Jan was less assured. Christo drew something out of the heavy folds of his jacket, barely visible in the gloom. It looked like a bulky gun with a camera lens where the barrel should have been. He extended the stock, nestled it in the crook of his arm, pointed it at a bank of cloud overhead and pulled the trigger. Jan thought he saw a brief haze in the air, but aside from that nothing happened.

‘I lit up the cloud so Aurelie knows where we are,’ Christo said by way of explanation. ‘She’ll handle the extraction, I'm getting her out of there, then we’re gone. Easy in, easy out.’

‘The cloud didn’t shine,’ Jan said, feeling a little stupid.

‘No, not with a light our eyes can see,’ Christo tapped the camera-thing. ‘This projects a ray of refined light, bluer than blue. Some of it lights up that cloud, though we can’t see it and nor can anyone on the other side apart from our friend.’

‘How can she do that if the light’s invisible?’ The man didn't seem to hear him, engrossed in adjusting the strange device.

'When this is done, Christo, am I free to go?'

'Sure,' Christo replied distractedly.

'Free like I was back in the warehouse?'

Christo carefully set the device aside and turned to him.

'If you want to go, you are free to do so. You guided me to the reservation and for that you have my gratitude. I won't keep you here against your will - what good is a freedom fighter who isn’t free? But tell me, what will you do after you have left?'

'I'd heard there were people fighting against Arco in Fifteen - I'm going to join them.'

'You sought us out, right? We're not what you expected.'

Jan laughed at that. It had come out more bitter than he'd intended, but Christo smiled.

'Arco took my daughter from me,' Jan said. 'To this day I don't know why, but I will make them pay.'

'I don't doubt it.' Christo smiled again, but this time it didn't reach his eyes. The naive young idealist that Jan had taken him for was gone. His voice grew harder, taking on the tones of a rehearsed speech.

'It seems like everyone I ever knew died to fight Arco. Then the next generation dies avenging them and nothing ever changes. Nothing can ever change, not whilst the Dyn reign over all of us. They turn us on one another and nobody even thinks to challenge them because they're beyond reach, because their power over us seems so overwhelming and we're too busy just trying to survive from one day to the next.'

'You're saying it’s futile,' said Jan, and in saying it aloud he knew it to be true. A wave of despair washed over him.

'No, Jan.' Christo placed a firm hand on his shoulder. 'What I'm saying is vengeance can be a motivation, but it can never be a cause. Vengeance looks backwards, but we must be always looking forwards, to the future. I will never have children, I will never even know the joy you once knew. They sterilised me; a trial run, but one day it will begin en masse, though even Arco doesn't know it. Quietly the Dyn will steal our future from us.'

Jan’s breath caught in his throat. He felt anger stir again, true anger, unlike any other feeling he had known since that fateful day when they had taken Eva. Jan had spent the last years resigned to his fate, but it was as if Christo’s words had suddenly snapped his thoughts out of that pattern.

'My only future will be my legacy,' Christo continued, still in that rehearsed tone. 'I said we were revolutionaries, not rebels or insurrectionists, because we're going to change everything. We're going to cast the Dyn from the heavens, and with the strings cut their puppets in Arco will come crashing down with them. There will be no more glittering chain, no more imposed firmament. One day a child will be able to look up at the stars and know that nothing will be withheld from them.

‘So what do you say Jan?' Christo asked, a fierce glint in his eyes. 'Are you with us?'

'I'm with you,' Jan answered. There didn’t seem to be any alternative.

Christo grinned at him, then suddenly checked his watch, a flash of apprehension crossing his features. He passed Jan a second watch and the strange gun.

'She should be in by now... In fifteen minutes I want you to shoot at the clouds again, just like I did. I'll be back shortly after that.' Christo scanned the wall with the binoculars one last time. 'Stay low and be ready.'

'How're you getting over the wall?'

'Oh, I'm not going over the wall,' laughed Christo, inscrutable as ever.

Jan made to ask something else but Christo was already off, scrabbling down into the crater, not even deigning to follow the track. Within moments he was only visible through the binoculars, a rapidly shrinking blob of false colour. Jan settled into the undergrowth to wait, every sense heightened. He felt the slow worming of the false creepers beneath him, smelt their pungent, rotten tang and heard the soft clicking of alien fauna.

Jan felt his eyes drawn again to the Other Moon. It looked significantly more menacing than usual, though he still had his doubts about Christo’s story. It was too strange, too mythical. He would have enjoyed this once, to lie alone and stargaze. Eva had enjoyed it. Jan fidgeted restlessly, shifting his legs and snapping the few exploring tendrils that had risen up.

After a quarter of an hour Jan did as he’d been instructed, raising the weapon and firing its invisible beam into the clouds. Yet another five minutes passed and still nothing happened. He began to worry something had gone terribly wrong - how long should he wait? If Arco had caught Christo, it would not be long before they began to scour the surroundings for accomplices. He tried to push the thought from his mind.

Jan saw the explosion before he felt it. The wall was suddenly blown outwards, sending a gout of debris flying hundreds of metres. He had just enough time to press himself to the ground before the blast wave struck. Jan’s hands flew to his ears as the overpressure stabbed painfully, driving air from his lungs. His ears still ringing, Jan felt rather than heard it, like thunder in his chest. Rubble rained down on the jungle around him, larger fragments of shattered concrete thunking into the earth closer to the breach.

Through it, amidst the clearing dust and smoke, Jan glimpsed the alien vista beyond. A landscape not unlike the false jungle, but tamed. A false garden, lit by the eerie light of the Other Moon.

The shrill alarm brought him back to the now, bright searchlights reaching out into the night. From within the wall Jan was sure he could hear automatic gunfire and the drone of an engine. He crouched low, hardly daring to breathe.

Suddenly a rugged car emerged, spinning frantically and accelerating away, barely keeping to the track. As it closed he made out two figures within - Christo and Aurelie? Evidently there’d been a change of plan. Spotlights skittered after the vehicle and Jan could see figures around the breach, clambering over the rubble in pursuit. Further explosions detonated along the barrier’s length.

The vehicle wound its way up the incline and Jan started running to meet it. The car braked hard alongside him with a screech of stressed tyres. An indistinct shape was lashed down and covered with a tarpaulin in the flatbed. The thing twitched like a piece of broken machinery.

A wild-eyed, bloodied Christo leant out of the cab.

‘Get on the back. And hold on tight.’

‘Is that a -’ Jan started to say, jabbing his arm at the thrashing thing.

‘How could it be?’ Christo interrupted, winking at Jan. ‘Such a thing is surely impossible, so why bother to wonder? Take this, set it to a thousand nm, and cover us. Now get in - be quick or be dead!’

Jan did as he was told, clambering into the cab. He could only hope that the hostage would make their pursuers think twice before shooting at them. Christo threw the camera-gun straight at him. Jan caught it awkwardly and leant out of the cab’s rear window.

‘Is this a test?’ He shouted back as the driver, presumably Aurelie, gunned the engine. The jolt nearly knocked Jan over but he steadied, raising the weapon.

‘Everything is!’ Christo called back.

Jan shifted the weapon in his hand, turning the dial on one side until the glowing readout displayed ‘1000nm’. He held the flimsy stock up to his shoulder.

Dozens of Arco soldiers were swarming, like ants around a collapsed nest. They were cautious, checking for more buried explosives, but a few were already working their way into the crater.

It had been a long time since Jan had fired a real gun. That day, standing between Eva and a phalanx of Arco goons, he had failed as completely as any father could fail. They’d knocked him aside because he was too insignificant to even bother killing. His grip tightened on the trigger as he remembered. Jan lifted the camera-gun to his eye and aimed through the strange sight; a dot projected onto a glassy plate. He breathed in, smiled wolfishly and pulled the trigger.

Flames leapt up along the path he traced with the sight, burning bright and harsh. The weapon hummed almost inaudibly as a fan cycled air through its components but there was no recoil, although the movement of the vehicle made it hard to aim. He adjusted his stance and fired again. This time his aim was true, a receding guard collapsing in flames. He held the trigger down, feeling his own anger pouring into the weapon’s invisible beam. A moment later and the crater was lost amid deepening foliage. Jan relaxed back into the cab seat, lowering the gun.

‘Aurelie, this is Jan. Jan, Aurelie,’ Christo said over the roar of the engine. ‘She’s been my man on the inside, so to speak.’

Jan nodded blankly at Aurelie. Dressed in a spotless Arco uniform, she was quite still and apparently unfazed by his sudden intrusion. Her grey eyes darted up to meet his and he was compelled to look away. There was something strange behind that gaze.

Chapter 7: Memory

A little over one hundred and fifty years ago, a projectile had struck the Ascensor, severing the orbital tether just above its anchorpoint. The explosion had shattered its carbyne chains and sent tens of thousands of kilometers of cable whiplashing upwards. The remainder of the tether had fallen with deceptive grace, levelling the surrounding landscape as it impacted. For the first time in centuries, the inhabitants of Earth were trapped in their cradle. The fragments of tether, almost invincibly strong and difficult to remove, had simply been concreted around to form the launch pans that serviced the region. Workers had splashed crude alien sigils on the ground. Vash doubted those above had the slightest intention of lifting their prohibition on anything of human origin leaving the stratosphere. He was to be an exception, nothing more.

A sound like muted thunder drowned out the distant crashing of surf and cawing of gulls and the thick clouds were lit from within. The diffuse glow narrowed into a tripod of exhaust beams as the lander descended. Corbin pulled something out of his pocket and frowned.

‘A hundred microsieverts just from that glare,’ he mused, tapping the gadget with one finger. ‘We should lodge a complaint about dangerous working conditions.’

Vash returned Corbin’s faint smile, raising a palm to shield his own eyes. The exhaust glare was almost bright enough to burn his skin.

‘I’m not sure what I expected them to send, but it wasn’t this,’ Corbin said after a long pause. ‘The dosimeter reading means it’s nuclear. That lander has to be a closed cycle rocket, because otherwise we’d already be keeling over and vomiting up our guts. But it’s not well designed, or we wouldn’t still get this trickle of radiation leakage.’

Vash raised an eyebrow.

‘I take an interest in these things,’ Corbin shrugged.

‘Your point?’

‘I’m not sure I have a point,’ Corbin said, looking thoughtfully at the dosimeter, then back at Vash. The glare illuminated both their faces.

‘This is the first time I’ve ever seen one of the Dyn machines up close. The rest of the time it’s just lights in the sky and cryptic messages. I expected something beyond my understanding, not this flying brick.’

‘This has been on your mind for a while,’ Vash offered.

‘I’ve had my doubts. Why would the Dyn rely on Arco to run things for them? Why occupy the depopulated husks of our orbital habitats? Why their reliance on us, even now, for technical expertise? Seeing this confirms it; I don’t know how it’s possible, but the Dyn are lower tech than us - they have been all along.’

‘Go on,’ Vash said. He felt a lurch in his stomach, as though hearing someone else give voice to his suspicions confirmed them.

‘I’ve heard rumours, old stories about the world before, the world we built. If even a quarter of those stories are true then whoever built that -’ he flung his arm out towards the Dynic craft, wobbling slightly as it settled on its landing gear. ‘Couldn't have won, not unless everything I’ve heard is a lie. Is it?’

‘It’s not a lie,’ Vash said; he found he couldn’t quite look his subordinate in the eye. ‘I can’t describe the old world; there are no words... They thought they could do anything - that misfortune was behind them.’

‘Try me,’ Corbin said brusquely. ‘We both know you might not come back from orbit. It’s your duty to ensure someone remembers.’

‘Nice and direct,’ Vash smiled weakly. ‘I don’t have any intention of dying today.’

‘Few people ever do sir, but I have to know. What kind of world was it, before the Dyn?’

Vash’s smile turned into a grimace and his eyes shifted away from the world as it was now and focused on somewhere else, separated not just by the passage of time but by a barrier of doubt and disbelief.

‘Just imagine if in a moment everything necessary vanished without warning,’ Vash said, in reverent cadence. ‘Not just the glue of society but the fundamental principles upon which the world operates; a great absence. Then in the midst of all that, the panic of invasion. More people dying in a matter of hours than had in the preceding century. Imagine that, with no explanation or context; just death and collapse when before the world had been almost flawless.’

Corbin spoke slowly, but Vash noted his impatience. ‘I asked about the world before. What was it like?’

Vash hardly seemed to be listening.

‘If something comparable happened to us now; if Arco fell and all our machines stopped working, civilisation would collapse. Yet that’s not what happened.’

‘What did happen?’

‘Within weeks, an interim government had been created and the destruction was under control. There was no war of all against all, no mass starvation. They carried on, despite the loss of everything. It’s only now, with successive generations worn down by time, that things are truly failing. Can you imagine what humanity must have been at the start, the kind of world that must have been, to be that sane? Imagine all that, and it’s still nothing compared to the world of the Utilitaria.’

Corbin’s eyebrows rose at that last word and Vash abruptly cut himself off. The Utilitaria; the entity that had vanished just when humanity needed it most, a final and terminal betrayal. Gulls circling above cawed emptily, serene and oblivious.

‘Then how could we have lost?’ Corbin said. There was a charge in the air, a sense that he was treading close to something dangerous and forbidden, but Vash also heard the pleading.

‘I don’t know.’

Even now it was difficult to admit. Vash saw Corbin’s hurt expression and knew the man thought he was withholding something. After so many years, Vash didn’t know if he could believe his own memories. But the truth remained; he didn’t understand what had happened. Both men lapsed into silence.

‘Well, your chariot awaits,’ Corbin said dryly, as if the entire conversation hadn’t happened. Vash forced a grimace, his eyes still fixed on the lander. ‘Is everything ok? The flight will be over in minutes - ’

‘They’ve never requested a meeting in person before,’ Vash said, speaking over Corbin. ‘The phone has sufficed thus far. What’s changed?’

‘You said the voice was different - new leadership maybe?’

Vash shrugged.

‘Even if we knew enough to speculate it’s besides the point, I have no choice but to go.’ Corbin nodded and Vash turned to leave. Then he hesitated, seized by a sudden, inexplicable discomfort.

‘The Meyer situation… ’ Vash began.

‘All under control,’ Corbin said breezily, waving the query away. He met Vash’s gaze with a smile.

‘Good...’ The moment passed. ‘Good,’ Vash said, more assuredly.

At five thirty Corbin woke up, just as he did every day. Rather than tending to the paperwork that piled his lectern as he usually would he dressed and left his apartment, making his way down through the dim, deserted corridors and stairwells of the block as quietly as possible. He had no interest in moving into the former Director’s mansion - resources were stretched thin enough even without such extravagance. On the way out, he stopped to pick up two carefully resealed flasks of coffee.

The curfew was still in place, but Corbin had authorisation to break it if he had good reason to do so. He knew there was a good reason, but was less certain others would see it that way. It had been a long day following the lander’s departure, but Corbin had never hesitated. He knew what he had to do and what was necessary was never wrong, as Vash had once told him.

The Conurbation looked different at night; the streets, utterly deserted but for the odd Enforcer patrol, glistened under the artificial lights. Sounds echoed, every footfall took on a significance of its own. Corbin found it strangely calming, for it was almost possible to believe there was nothing wrong with the world. Then he’d notice the bleakness of the building facades, or a burnt out patrol vehicle and the impression would snap.

Corbin made his way over to the lift and upon arrival it chimed loudly in the empty hall. He selected the twenty-second basement level and stood, consciously relaxing each muscle until he felt a wave of calm. The lift juddered to a halt and chimed once more, the doors opening into a dingy low-ceilinged space, with corridors branching off. Each corridor in turn led on to further passages; all were lined with countless identical doors leading onto identical cell-like rooms. The place was a labyrinth, but that suited his purposes fine. He knew where to go. Presently he came to door B22-32114.

‘I need to speak to the prisoner,’ Corbin said, greeting the two Enforcers stationed outside. They scowled, looking almost ready to deny him entry, which sent a jolt of apprehension down his spine. Now there was no turning back; the first step was already taken. With a deep breath he turned the key in the lock as they stood aside. Light from the open door spilled across an overweight figure slumped on the bed. The door thudded shut behind them, muffling all sound. Meyer raised his head to stare at Corbin.

‘Good morning,’ he said. Meyer grunted.

Convincing the Director to implicate himself had been an easy task. Men like the former Director had any number of pressure points. But the compulsion hadn’t lasted. Meyer had allies, those that benefited from the corrupt system he’d built around himself. He’d begun to give his version of events. In somewhere as densely packed as Conurbation One, rumour spread quickly. There were already whisperings of dissent, and they would grow with time.

‘You promised me a comfortable retirement,’ Meyer said. ‘This is a prison cell. It’s solitary confinement, I might as well be dead.’

‘It’s temporary. Death isn’t,’ Corbin replied sharply.

‘It better be temporary,’ Meyer smiled. He sat up, swung his legs over the hard bed and paced over to Corbin. He was a few inches taller.

‘You see, I haven’t been nice and quiet like you hoped. Even here, there are people who’ll listen to me. The Directors don’t like Vash meddling in their affairs; they’ll support me. Your friend has upset too many powerful people. So I’m changing my offer. You give me double what you promised, you destroy what you’ve got on me and you get my silence…’

‘There was no offer, Meyer,’ said Corbin stiffly. ‘I told you what the deal was, and what I’d do to you if you didn’t accept it.’ He drew in a breath to shout for the guards, but Meyer cut him off.

‘Don’t bother. They might be too scared of you to let me out, but they sure as hell aren’t your men. I was good to them; they aren’t going to stroll in here and shoot me in cold blood. Another day or two and they’ll be telling the whole Conurbation who really killed all those innocent little protesters.’

‘You’d really risk everything just to further line your own pockets?’

‘Oh, shut it! Do you really think Arco is worth fighting for? You talk about the greater good but my staged downfall worked out just fine for you, didn’t it? The same goes for Vash, you’re either a pair of spectacular hypocrites or you genuinely believe your own lies. It doesn’t matter how messed up the world gets - you still believe it can be fixed, that every evil thing you do is excused because you’re making things better. Well let me tell you - it can’t be fixed!’

‘You truly believe that?’

‘None of this matters; the world spins down and everything dies. Someday the Dyn will decide to end this and finish us off. That’s the future, whether you accept it or not. Until then, I want a nice warm fireside and comfy apartments. You’re Director now. Best you understand your job is just to keep everyone cowed and live it up for as long as you can. The sooner you learn that lesson the better for all of us, even if it only means I never have to listen to your sanctimonious preaching again.’

‘And that’s your final answer?’ Corbin said. Meyer nodded with satisfaction.

‘Run along, little man. I won’t wait for -’

Corbin’s fist caught Meyer in the neck just above his adam’s apple. He folded up, gasping in pain and shock. His savage kick into Meyer’s groin doubled the man over. He grabbed Meyer by the lapels of his coverall and tripped him with one outstretched foot, slamming his head onto the corner of the bedside table. Corbin’s hands moved quickly to cover the stunned Meyer’s mouth and nose. He thrashed violently, his resistance weakening. His face blanched as he failed to draw breath, then the ex-director of Conurbation One went limp.

Corbin’s own breath escaped in a shiver. He let go of Meyer’s head and pressed a finger to the dead man’s neck, confirming the lack of pulse. It didn’t take long for Corbin’s heart rate to return to normal. He stood, straightened his clothes, and heaved Meyer’s body out of sight of the heavy cell door. At a hand signal through the tiny window, the guard swung the door open, looking wary. Corbin pulled the two flasks of integrity coffee out of his jacket and proffered them.

‘Everything ok in there?’

‘Yes,’ Corbin said, trying to keep his voice steady. ‘I’ve spoken with Meyer. We’ll be moving him out of the cells in a few days. It’s hardly fair to keep an innocent man locked up, am I right?’

The guards brightened, nodding conspiratorially and accepting the proffered drinks. Corbin smiled back and turned away, walking quickly towards the lift. Meyer would have been sentenced to death long ago, had he not used his position to avoid the consequences of his crimes. Corbin wondered whether he would miss this, in his new position as Director; few opportunities for fieldwork there. Ultimately he decided he wouldn’t.

A moment before the lift doors slid shut Corbin thought he made out two low thuds, as of bodies striking the ground. He hoped his conscience could deal with the two poisoned guards.

Chapter 8: Deterrence

Jan lost track of the violent turns and twists Aurelie executed as they attempted to evade their hypothetical pursuers. The car skidded over a rocky outcrop and spun wildly, but with a sharp turn of the wheel Aurelie brought it back under control. Its headlights were dipped, making it almost impossible to see more than a few metres ahead, yet somehow they never collided with anything truly dangerous.

Christo stripped off his jacket, revealing a long open wound on his shoulder.

‘Don’t look so worried, it’s just a graze. The guards were half asleep, but with the volume of fire they were pumping out, one of them had to get lucky.’

‘How many were on you?’ Jan said, dumbfounded. The car swerved again and they were nearly thrown out of their seats.

‘Not more than twenty,’ Christo replied nonchalantly. ‘They were much more cautious once we had our hostage.’

Reaching underneath the seat with his good arm, Christo opened a first aid kit and handed a bottle of antiseptic and dressing to Jan. Without a word, Jan raised the bottle and tipped the strong-smelling substance onto the revolutionary’s shoulder, reaching up to apply the dressing. His first attempt was interrupted as the transport skipped over a low stream, but on his second attempt the dressing stuck. Christo gritted his teeth.

‘What’s the plan here?’ Jan demanded. ‘Because you’ll be lucky if those above just kill you after they discover there’s one of them in the flatbed of this truck.’

‘The Dyn are paranoid and protective of their own; observe how carefully they wall themselves off from the outside world,’ said Aurelie. ‘They will be cautious because we have a valuable hostage. Arco will receive orders to stand off and observe.’

‘I know how a hostage works!’ Jan exploded. ‘But sooner or later they’re going to attempt to retrieve it. You’ve just made yourselves Arco’s priority!’

‘It won’t matter, we just need Arco to hesitate. Just a few days. Until -’ Christo cut himself off at a brief glance from Aurelie. Jan felt a jolt of worry; what counted as a step up from this? He slumped back into the seat, trying to calm jangling nerves.

Without warning, Aurelie swerved off the rough track they’d been following and ploughed deep into the undergrowth. Fronds of false life lashed against the windscreen, leaving sticky smears where they hit.

‘What’s wrong?’ Christo shouted.

‘Aircraft, sounds like a drone,’ answered Aurelie, slamming on the breaks as the car buried itself in a dense thicket. She killed the lights and engine. ‘Help me with the camo.’

Jan complied without question, taking his cue from Christo. Together they hastily fumbled the camo sheet over the vehicle, ignoring the shrill clicking emanating from the thing lashed down in the flatbed. They clambered back into the darkened cab, pulling the sheet down behind them. For a moment Jan couldn’t hear anything beyond the prisoner and their own heavy breathing. But then he heard the aircraft, an almost inaudible low droning, growing closer. The sound rose and fell as it circled above, making one pass after another.

‘Are you sure it can’t see us?’ hissed Jan.

‘The camo will hide us, it’ll even keep our heat signature hidden for a bit, but if the drone operators can hear over the sound of their own engines then we’re screwed,’ cursed Christo. ‘Any way to shut up our passenger, Aurelie?’

Sat in the pitch black confines of the cab the Dyn sounded uncomfortably close, still singing like some demented cicada.

‘Unfortunately Dynic physiology makes that challenging,’ she replied. ‘But it’s unlikely that the drone’s even equipped with mics. Just wait, it will pass.’

Christo fidgeted impatiently in the seat besides her. The minutes oozed by, the cab growing ever more stuffy, until finally the drone moved on and at last the thing in the flatbed quietened. Whether it had simply exhausted itself or realised the futility of its actions, Jan neither knew nor cared. Aurelie insisted they wait another couple of minutes before revealing themselves.

They finally reemerged from the jungle a couple of hours later, the dark canopy replaced by the half-light of the predawn sky. Jan scanned it nervously. The sun, still below the horizon, glinted off the wings of a distant drone. It circled like some vast carrion bird.

‘Not to worry,’ Christo said, as Aurelie pulled into a makeshift depot. ‘We’ll be moving on soon enough.’ Guards displaying the revolutionary insignia waved them in.

‘I thought we were returning to Fifteen,’ Jan said, looking to Christo for an answer.

‘Ha, no, way too much heat! Besides, that part of the journey is over,’ the man smiled.

The car wound its way through piled construction materials and industrial machinery until Aurelie stopped alongside a vast warehouse.

Pao emerged from behind a sheet of camouflage netting, dressed in cutoff fatigues. A long bayoneted rifle hung from a shoulder strap. He flicked on a torch and waved it in through the cab windows, dazzling Jan.

‘You took your time,’ he said with a scowl. Then his eyes shifted to the still-twitching shape in the flatbed and his face bleached. ‘First that wastelander and now this... You just taking in anything out the jungle these days?’

‘Oh, do shut up,’ Christo grinned as he climbed out of the car, jabbing a hand in the direction of the covered alien. ‘Get some of the others out here and tie the Dyn down up top.’

‘Hell, I wondered what had Arco’s spotters so riled up, but you’ve cracked if you think we’re taking that onboard -’

‘Just get it done, Pao. Lash it down securely where anyone who might be watching from, say, five hundred kilometers up, should be able to spot it. Comprende?’

‘There’s no way we’ll get away with this,’ Pao said, hands shifting in the direction of his rifle.

‘This is the only way we’ll get away with this,’ Christo snapped, voice hardening.

Pao grunted something unintelligible, lifting the camouflage netting to allow Jan, Aurelie and Christo to pass into the warehouse. It reminded Jan of a factory. A column of rebels passed in the opposite direction, some pausing to nod or greet Christo, while Aurelie somehow contrived to remain invisible even in the centre of the crush. It was bewildering; there was more heavy machinery than Jan had ever seen in one place before. Hot steam gushed from loose joints and sparks cascaded from things being welded to a structure that filled the warehouse. There was a sense of anticipation that was almost tangible. Whatever it was they were working on was almost complete.

Jan didn’t bother to ask where they were going next or how they were going to get there; he knew Christo well enough to realize he wouldn’t give a straight answer to such questions. Instead, without instruction or inclination to the contrary, he followed Christo and Aurelie up a set of stairs that wound upwards for what had to be more than a dozen metres. They emerged into a raised control room. Whilst Aurelie and Christo examined the banks of controls Jan looked down at the wide deck beneath, covered with netting. Small lights on the deck provided the only illumination, making the shape of the huge structure hard to discern. Men and women rushed to drag the netting away, revealing missile batteries and gun turrets.

‘It’s a fort,’ Jan said, incredulous.

‘You could say that,’ Christo said. ‘It’s certainly built to keep the outside world… outside. But we’ll need to be more proactive about that from now on. Thick walls won’t be enough.’

A klaxon sounded. Aurelie turned to Christo.

‘They’ve found us,’ she said. He merely nodded.

Jan heard shouts filtering up from the deck as netting was thrown from the flanks, revealing slats of grey armour. He thought he recognised Pao’s voice from somewhere behind, yelling orders to tie the prisoner down.

A cascade of bright spotlights ignited up out of nowhere, illuminating the deck fully. Jan glanced down and saw a huge white sawtoothed shape stretching across the entire deck - the ubiquitous insignia of the revolution.

‘There’s no way anyone could ignore what we’re about to do, you see,’ Christo said with a nonchalant shrug. ‘So there’s no more point in being subtle.’

Jan gaped as more lights came on, revealing the full size of the base. Jan could now see that it tapered to a blunt point ahead of him. The deck started to rumble as if all the heavy piping beneath them was breaking apart.

‘There’ll be here in a couple of minutes - helicopters, at least fifty soldiers. Drones are already overhead.’

The rumbling grew in intensity until it was a roar, drowning out everything.

‘Aurelie, everything’s ready. Let’s get going!’ Christo shouted, grinning. ‘Launch!’ he cried into a mic, to cheers from the occupied decks below.

The world-ending roar reached a climax and Jan stared ahead as the entire structure lurched forward, the warehouse wall ahead of them tearing like paper. The vast vehicle, no fort, departed from its hiding place with ponderous acceleration, annihilating a grove of trees and trailing discarded netting. Jan’s mind flashed back to the days before, to the trail of uprooted trees he’d spotted just before his first encounter with the revolution. He was beginning to understand how, but not why.

‘Do you want the drones shot down?’ asked Aurelie, a wry smile playing across her lips.

‘Let them watch!’ Christo called back, laughing.

‘You’re mad,’ Jan shouted over the thunder of the engines, shaking his head, but laughing all the same.

‘My friend, it is the world around us that is mad,’ Christo winked. ‘What would be crazy is reacting to this insanity in an ordinary manner.’

Chapter 9: Diplomacy

Vash woke feeling groggy and disorientated, although only a few hours had passed. His bones felt as though they had been stress-tested to breaking point. He strained in the webbing, shifting uncomfortably as he became aware of the sensation of free-fall building in his stomach. He groaned as every joint in his body protested. Vash had never enjoyed spaceflight even in its most refined state - his lapse into unconsciousness had been a small mercy.

In the centre of the screens that surrounded him, an orbital habitat was drawing closer, its scale impossible to judge. The structure was cylindrical, spinning around a non-rotating axial hub. For a moment Vash almost convinced himself that nothing had changed, but the hab lights were dark and as the lander drew closer still he could see the signs of disrepair. Ragged holes pitted the hull where debris had blown through. Heavy dark shapes, like fluted columns tipped with knives, floated at various angles around the wheel. Dyn spacecraft; the product of a technology and a mode of thought utterly different to that of humanity. Less advanced, with their nuclear reactors and steam-jet nozzles, but more refined.

Stabs of thrust adjusted the course, flashes of hydrazine aligning the craft with the axial docking spine. There was a jarring thud as the docking clamps engaged. The silence was broken only by creaking as the lander settled. Vash had been unsure of what to expect, but it wasn’t this. He disentangled himself from the webbing and kicked off awkwardly in the direction of the airlock. He saw now that it had been repurposed from a human craft and crudely welded into place. The air that cycled into the lock was thick with moisture, a potent mix of exotic hydrocarbons and too much oxygen, all of which only worsened the nausea he felt in microgravity.

The corridor beyond was deserted and dark, the hub beyond that the same, lit only by the faint glow of what appeared to be a bioluminescent algae-analogue smeared over the walls. It had been painted in a rough trail leading deeper into the hab, guiding him to an elevator. He didn’t call out - something about the quiet watchfulness of the place cautioned against it. He felt the nausea of microgravity fade; it was replaced by the peculiar twisting sensation of coriolis.

As he descended the gravity increased smoothly up to a gee, then further still. One and a half gees, he guessed, but there was no way to tell. He could hear condensed moisture begin to trickle down the elevator’s walls. Vash came abruptly to a halt before the doors opened and was knocked back by the vista that confronted him.

The habitat interior was almost entirely open, broken only by the remains of hastily torn out bulkheads, arcing up over Vash’s head where it disappeared in a mass of storm clouds. Rain lashed down, stinging where it hit his skin. He squinted into the gloom and in the distance he saw someone; a human figure sat cross-legged, alone in the expanse. Apprehensively, he made his way forwards. The convoluted root networks of low Dynic flora threatened to trip him with every step. The figure was a woman of perhaps twenty.

‘Hello?’ he called, feeling faintly ridiculous. She remained motionless. Vash walked closer, his sense of unease worsening.

Her head was bowed, features obscured by long dark hair that hung dripping over thin shoulders. She wore a crudely cut smock, which was similarly soaked; the flimsy parasol she held was completely inadequate in the face of the torrential rain. As Vash approached, the girl looked up, flashing an imitation of a smile.

‘Welcome Ambassador Vash, it is good to see you,’ said the girl, her voice sweet, but flat, somehow off. The voice from the phone.

‘K’txl?’ he managed, stumbling over the transliteration.

‘That is my name, but I believe Liar to Animals would be the closest translation into your own tongue,’ the girl replied without the slightest trace of irony. ‘Please, sit.’ She smiled again, gesturing at the sodden imitation of a picnic spread.

He did as he was asked, drawing his coat around him. She passed him a teacup, full to the brim with tepid rainwater. A teabag sat at the bottom. In spite of himself Vash accepted it, his mind still racing to catch up and struggling to process the entirely unexpected reality he was confronted with. The rain eased off to a steady drizzle.

‘It is such wonderful weather we are having today,’ the girl remarked, making a show of looking around. ‘Would you like some more tea?’ She handed him another teacup before he could answer.

‘- I’m fine for drink,’ he replied, accepting the teacup and placing it to one side of him. She didn’t seem to even notice.

‘How about food? Are you hungry? Are you tired? Or would you like to have sex with me? Would that not be in the spirit of a mutually beneficial cooperative relationship?’ She grasped his hands in hers.

‘No, no, I’m good.’ Vash shivered, pulling away. The girl, Liar to Animals, was watching him, her head tilted to one side, her smile fading.

‘I realise you must have questions.’

‘You’re human,’ he said abruptly, but without conviction.

In response the girl delicately gathered her hair to one side, bowing her head. Vash leant forwards, his breathing shallow. Scar tissue showed beneath stubble. Thick cables sprouted from crudely implanted ports in the base of her skull and behind one ear. They snaked away across the plains towards a dense thicket of foliage. Vash withdrew unsteadily, feeling the hairs on the back of his neck rise as he scoured the shadows.

‘I am Liar to Animals. I am Dyn. This body is little more than a puppet.’ She - it - looked at him, meeting his gaze. And behind the empty eyes Vash swore he could see something alien looking out at him.

‘That tech is -’

‘Repurposed. Much of the functioning of old human technology remains opaque to us, but we have made significant progress through reverse engineering. The field of brain/computer interfaces has been of particular personal interest. We examine the human and Dynic brain, map how they represent concepts and sensations, and construct a bridge between the two. The barriers between our minds become porous, and the more that I experience the more I understand the perversities of human nature.’

‘What has happened to her?’

‘She lives. When I use this body she sleeps. And when she wakes she will not remember this meeting. You cannot help her.’

The girl sat completely motionless, hands folded in her lap. A silence stretched between them as she watched Vash. And then suddenly, without prompting, she asked the last question he would have expected.

‘Tell me Vash, do you consider me to be evil?’

He hesitated. ‘I think that it would be a mistake to moralise.’

‘You hate me for my part in what has been done to the people of Earth,’ K’txl said flatly.

‘I don’t hate you, no, though many do. I don’t consider you to be evil. But your goals are not my own.’

‘What are your goals, Vash?’ she asked, cocking her head to one side. He didn’t respond to that. K’txl merely smiled lifelessly and took a sip from her watery cup.

‘You fascinate me, Vash - in many ways you’re more human than any of them. When you talk of your goals, your motives, you don’t speak of self-interest do you? You appeal to something more fundamental. Do you remember what you said to me, the first time we spoke? You said you wanted to do what was right.’

K’txl reached out a thin arm, tracing the outline of Vash’s unshaven jaw with a cold finger as if he were a specimen of some fascinating, but dangerous animal. He sat calmly as the rain soaked through the coat, willing himself not to cringe away.

‘Right. Another story you tell yourselves, another thread of the mass hallucination that is human existence; like law or currency or justice,’ she continued, speaking as though the very words were an affront. ‘You don’t live in the real world. You would kill each other for the sake of things which do not exist. War for the sake of ideas. When we learnt of your nature we were… baffled is too insubstantial. We found it impossible. It was insane. We were afraid.’

‘Is that why you attacked Earth without warning?’

‘No,’ she said, expression hardening. ‘We attacked you in self-defence.’

‘How can you claim that?’ Vash said, voice rising. He recoiled from her touch, pausing for a moment before he said something regrettable. ‘Were you truly so paranoid?’

‘Not paranoia, prediction. Humanity had a great knowledge of the rules that govern reality and with that came power. But you used that knowledge to contort reality so that it reflected your waking dreams. We knew that you would not be able to tolerate our existence, that our nature would have been another wrong that had to be righted. So we acted first.’

‘I don’t understand.’

‘I don’t understand you, Vash,’ she leant forward again, eyes focussing on his. ‘And that is the problem.’ Rain dripped from the tips of the parasol and ran down her face and hair. Vash watched a drop run over her forehead and drip onto her eyeball. She didn’t blink.

‘Was that why you brought me here, to study me in the flesh?’

‘Wars are fought over conflicts of interest, over differences. As my line flourished they competed with other lines for territory and resources. The victorious lineage would take what is desired. But that is not so with wars of ideas, not when it is our very nature that is the difference. It would be a war of extermination. That is why I must understand you. I must get inside your minds.’

‘That’s why you’ve connected yourself to the girl,’ Vash said. A horrible realisation was floating just beyond his awareness, like a forgotten word that defied memory.

‘Conflict between my domain and others is coming to a head. There are many who wish to end your world and the threat it represents. I must have a solution to the difference between our species. I must understand the decisions you make.’

‘The decisions I make,’ Vash breathed. ‘You really weren’t going to kill anyone in Conurbation One, were you? That was another experiment you performed on me?’

The girl clapped her hands together and let out a bark of delighted laughter.

‘Yes, now you understand! This thing you call right is the key - I observed and recorded your words as you deliberated my ultimatum. I saw inside your mind, just as I am now inside the mind of this human girl. And so we make progress.’

Behind Vash’s back, where his arms rested on the picnic mat, his hands curled together, knuckles whitening. It lasted only a moment, before the fingers relaxed. He was another conduit for the still-unseen K’txl, just like this girl; another experiment.

‘Hundreds of people died.’

‘Yes,’ K’txl said. She took another sip from the cup. ‘For us, there is no fear in individual death.’

‘The Dyn don’t fear death?’ Vash said incredulously. ‘All of evolution is against that -’

‘A line and domain may persist, even when a single Dyn is dead. If one dies for the sake of one’s line then all that matters continues after death. What is there to fear but the end of the line? And I do fear that Vash, make no mistake. I have been attacked.’

‘You’ve been attacked? When did this happen?’

‘My other, the next of my line,’ K’txl corrected. ‘The night after I summoned you here he was abducted from my domain by a group of rebels.’

‘This other, he is your son?’

‘The first of my sons, the one who will become Liar to Animals when this self dies. I have invested much in the shaping of his mind, and would not wish to see his life go to waste. You will recover him for me.’

‘I’m not your soldier.’

‘You will lead a party... I come to you directly because those that would challenge me cannot be allowed to know. They are a threat to us both. Consider this the next experiment, if you like.’

‘What happens if I fail?’

The girl’s lips twisted up again in that pale imitation of a smile.

‘I will be forced to call for a more immediate response to our differences.’

The image on the memory machine’s screen was gray and blurred by compression artefacts. Vash watched the drone footage for a second time, almost unable to believe what he was seeing.

A heavily modified crawler, the kind isolated conurbations used to move essential supplies and lay roads, was framed in the centre. It burst from a warehouse, a blurry but unmistakably alien figure lashed to the top of it like Prometheus chained to the rocks, before ploughing into the jungle as it travelled north-east, leaving behind a trail of destruction. Corbin’s finger tapped on the screen.

‘That’ll be our missing Dyn. The first reports arrived while you were off-world; a breach in one of the largest reservations, not far from Conurbation Fifteen. We tracked their vehicle back to the warehouse but by the time Enforcers arrived it was too risky to engage -  it’s not as though we can use restraint and precision against a mobile fortress. I checked the crawler’s registration - it was pulled out of circulation for maintenance just over a fortnight back...’

‘Do we still have eyes on the crawler?’

‘Yes, they didn’t seem to have any problem with the drone. They’re not trying to hide, but I’ve ordered the Enforcers in pursuit to hang back.’

‘Good,’ said Vash, taking a deep breath. ‘Good work.’ Corbin nodded. Grey afternoon light filtered into his office through the broad window.

‘No matter what weapons those revolutionaries have improvised or stolen from us, they can’t expect to hold out for long... Just how important is this Dyn? As diplomatic incidents go, it can’t get much worse than a bunch of rebels driving around with the equivalent of a giant middle finger pointed at the sky. It would be much simpler if we could just-’

‘Don’t even consider it,’ Vash interrupted. ‘The Dyn have demanded we recover it - him - alive and unharmed. She implied if we didn’t there would be dire consequences.’

‘She?’

‘The Dyn leaders are female.’

‘You actually met it, face to face; what was that like?’

‘I’d rather not say.’

Vash typed more commands into the keyboard, freezing the feed with bulk of the vehicle in the middle of the screen. A sigil like a jagged mountain was visible, daubed across the entire top deck. It was hauntingly familiar.

Corbin broke the silence.

‘Sir... this entire situation doesn’t make sense. Hijacking a crawler, kidnapping a Dyn and daubing that sign on the deck - it’s insane. The whole thing is so overt that it’s as if they want us to notice.’

Vash stared, transfixed at that symbol. It didn’t belong in this time or place. He’d last seen that symbol on the hand of a man long-dead, who’d spoken of ‘warseeds’ and ‘dragon’s teeth’. What was it doing here?

‘Are you alright?’

‘Does that symbol mean anything to you?’ Vash asked.

‘I spoke to the local Director. The enforcers have been scraping that sign off the walls of conurbations in the region for a couple of months. This new rebel group has clearly emerged recently. Why, is it important?’

‘Perhaps it is just coincidence. If not, it may be more important than anything else.’

‘You’ve lost me, sir.’

Vash reached beneath to the keyboard, shifting the image to frame the symbol in the centre.

‘Is that a mountain or a jagged tooth?’ Vash asked, innocently. ‘Could it be, say, a dragon’s tooth?’

Corbin sighed, squinting down at the image.

‘Now that you’ve put the suggestion in my mind I can’t be sure what I’m seeing. I suppose it could be the canine of some predator. What’s the significance of that?’

Vash let out a hollow laugh then abruptly cut himself off when he saw Corbin’s expression.

‘I suppose the Enforcer academies skipped the classical education. It’s an old myth. The goddess of wisdom, Athena, devised a plan to sow dragon’s teeth into the ground and the teeth grew into fully-fledged warriors.’

Corbin didn’t say anything for a moment, weighing his words.

‘Sir, with all due respect, the Dyn ships are already descending into lower orbits - look at the sky and you can see their drives flaring. We don’t have time for pondering the origins and implications of the symbols of various insurrectionist groups. Just tell me what your point is in plain Americano and I’ll lead the party - I’m sure you could do with a rest.’

Vash considered for a moment whether to share his suspicions, but something stopped him.

‘Get gunships prepared for departure,’ he said, switching off the memory machine with a dull whirr. ‘We’re going to meet the revolution.’

Chapter 10: Dominance

That first day passed in a confused blur. There seemed to be no end to the tasks required of them, with work still continuing on the crawler even as it was under way. Jan lent his hand wherever he could. Finally as night fell all but a skeleton crew gathered in the improvised mess to celebrate. Flagons of cheaply distilled liquor were produced and somebody rigged music to play over the comms.

It was strange; even though Jan barely knew the crew he already felt a sense of camaraderie. What they were doing was insane, provocatory and dangerous, but while the tank drove on it was possible to feel invincible. He’d even joined in the cheer from the gantry when one of the guns opened up on the drone above, lighting up the night like an improvised fireworks display and blowing the small aircraft apart.

After a brief, perfunctory speech Christo had vanished, leaving Jan alone with the others. The man seemed preoccupied which had struck him as odd; Christo thrived in moments like these. But Jan dismissed the thought; Christo would be busy with the next stage of the plan - whatever that might be. Instead he resolved to enjoy himself, mixing with the off-duty revolutionaries. He’d heard a dozen stories of how each of them had come to Christo’s cause, every one different. They’d been disaffected Enforcers, engineers from the conurbations, plantation workers and more recruited by Christo from across the Americas. They in turn had listened enraptured as he told his own story, nodding sympathetically as he spoke of his daughter’s abduction and leaning in conspiratorially to hear of the mission to the reservation. The attention had made him uncomfortable at first, but as the moonshine flowed he’d found release in talking. He’d been on his own for far too long.

‘What’s the point of all this?’ Jan said, finally. ‘Stealing this machine, taking a Dyn hostage, heading north? I’ve tried asking Christo, but he’s a man who answers questions with more questions.’

There were a few knowing laughs at that.

‘It’s proof that we can fight back, that the human spirit will endure,’ a bright-eyed young man answered.

‘Christo knows what he’s doing. He always has. You just have to trust him,’ replied another. Some just shrugged jokingly or smiled as though trying to convey they knew more than the others. Jan didn’t know what to make of that, but he had a sense Christo hadn’t told the crew the whole story. This had to be more than a suicide pact, surely.

‘Christo tells you exactly what you need to know and nothing more,’ came Tuva’s slurred voice as she pushed her way clumsily through the huddle. She looked pointedly at Jan. ‘So that some... infiltrator can’t go blab to Arco.’

The group exchanged looks with one another and sniggered amongst themselves. Jan held her gaze impassively. Someone put their arm around her shoulders to lead her away but she shoved it aside.

‘Watch your back, wastelander!’ she called as she stalked off.

Sometime later, when the others had also stumbled back to their bunks and hammocks, Jan found himself standing alone out on the gantry with the wind whipping past his ears as the massive vehicle rumbled onwards. The Other Moon rose high enough to be visible over the horizon-hugging clouds while the lights of orbiting Dynic spacecraft and satellites glimmered, brighter than Jan had ever known them. They were descending, approaching closer to the Earth; he spotted the minute spikes of their rockets firing to bring them down. It couldn’t be a coincidence - the Dyn were descending because they wanted to keep a close eye on Christo and his revolution.

To flee would be the sensible, sane thing to do. He should be running as far as possible from the focus of that malevolent constellation. At any moment one of those lights in the sky might flare with sudden brightness, and they would all die in screaming fire. But Jan knew he wouldn’t leave. As ever, the culprit was curiosity; the same disease that had led him inadvertently to the revolution and in the end, taken Eva from him. She’d only wanted to learn about the world, and the world had punished her for that. He had to know what the plan was, even if it meant only the slightest chance that he might avenge his daughter.

Jan felt a little giddy; that crude liquor had unsettled his thoughts. He glanced at the ladder behind him, before looking side to side. He had often wondered just what the Dyn looked like, and might never get a better chance to find out. Before he lost his nerve, Jan walked over to the ladder and placed a hand on the cold metal, pulling himself upwards. The wind whistled harder as he rose.

He clambered onto the deck and turned up towards the projecting control room, eyes skating over the mostly empty platform. A few figures were clustered at the prow, spotting for dangerous lights in the sky, but otherwise he was alone. The night shift crew were all on the lower decks.

The Dyn lay in the exact centre, lower limbs secured to the deck by heavy pitons. Jan’s breath caught in his throat, the animal fear he felt at being so close to his oppressor rising again.

Jan’s first impression was of a bear. That impression quickly diminished as he drew closer. He got within a few metres of it, keeping to the shadows beyond the arc lights. The Dyn had a hunched, powerful torso, with four almost identical ropey limbs splayed in strange places. They were neither conventional limbs nor tentacles but some odd hybrid of the two. The forelimbs ended in grotesquely elongated claws while the hindlimbs could have almost been jointed tails, projecting seamlessly from the end of the torso. The pallid skin had the glistening texture of plastic where it was exposed but much of the creature was coated in some kind of mossy false life. The head was pointed and triangular with three thick plates for jawbones; more mechanical than animal. Two thin strakes of black jelly seemed to serve it for eyes. The head twisted in a queasy fashion that reminded Jan of a neck snapping, and it stared right at him. Those eyes seemed far too intelligent.

His jacket flapped about violently in the wind, and Jan lurched forward as a gust unsteadied him, tripping over a loose deckplate into the glare of the floodlights. A shadow loomed over. He looked up, confronted by the bottomless pit of an alien eye just inches from his own. As the Dyn regarded him a soft clicktrain bubbled up from deep within its throat. Jan’s courage failed entirely and he scrambled backwards, retreating down the ladder, head swimming. There couldn’t have been many people who’d come that close to a Dyn and lived. He stumbled below deck, navigating corridors and collapsing into his hammock.

As Jan fell into the bunk, he felt around in his pocket for the reassuring form of Eva’s photograph. With a lurch in his stomach, he realised it wasn’t there. He started and rolled off the hammock, to the muted complaint of the slumbering forms beside him, and began to feel frantically around on the floor.

‘The photograph! Where’s the photograph!’ he hissed.

‘What’re you on about? My shift’s in two hours.’

‘Shut up, I’m trying to get some sleep!’

Fighting back a rising headache, Jan dashed out of the bunk room and back onto the top deck, wondering if he’d somehow dropped it when he’d fallen. He hoped against hope that the photograph hadn’t been blown off the deck. As soon as he’d ascended the ladder Jan saw it, flapping in the wind, snagged on the deckplate. This time the Dyn didn’t stir as he approached, but that dark eye watched him all the while as he retrieved it. The figure of a smiling girl in a crumpled t-shirt, with a heart-shaped face, hazel eyes and long black hair was just visible on one side. Exhausted, he returned to the bunk and sank into a broken, restless sleep.

Not many hours later, a shrill klaxon woke Jan for the morning shift. His head pounding from the short night and illicit alcohol, Jan cleared away his hammock in the mess and helped unpack tables and benches.

The ‘mess hall’ was in fact several repurposed storage compartments, low-ceilinged and windowless. It was still the largest space in the crawler, aside from the rear compartment where cars and other bulky items were stored. The goodwill the others had shown Jan the night before had faded considerably; evidently his nighttime antics had not impressed. Jan was too exhausted and hungry to care; he knew there would be more backbreaking labour in the day ahead, and didn’t want to face any of it on an empty stomach.

Having readied the room Jan joined the queue for food. Today’s offering was grey gruel and potatoes, but at least he didn’t have to catch it himself. He had to admit that the knowledge he wouldn’t go hungry each night was a comfort. The regimented days and the cramped, foul-smelling rooms were the other side of that particular coin. Just as he reached the bowl-laden table, Tuva stepped in front of him, elbowing him out of the way.

‘Back of the line, wastelander,’ she hissed, pouring herself a huge bowl of the gruel. Someone behind Jan shoved him into Tuva, guffawing as he did - Pao. Of course it would be Pao. Jan jolted into her, spilling the gruel over her already stained overalls. Tuva turned around, features a mask of anger. She was thin, but Jan noticed the wiry muscles flexing under her clothes.

‘What do you say to me now?’ she smiled.

‘It wasn’t me,’ Jan said, trying to keep his voice level. He turned to see Pao grinning at him and Tuva, the others backing off. There was a hush in the room as everyone turned to watch the new entertainment.

‘You think you’re going to beat Arco with that attitude?’ she mocked, her voice turning high-pitched, mimicking his accent. ‘Oh, I’m sorry it wasn’t me. Oh please don’t hurt me. Please don’t take my lovely daughter.’

‘Yeah,’ said Pao from behind him. ‘Maybe if you weren’t such a pussy you could have stopped them from taking her.’

‘Drew quite the audience for your convenient little backstory last night Jan… and where did you go after everyone else went to sleep, huh? To go check in with Arco? Or up to the deck to plead with your masters directly?’

Jan made to leave, but Pao stopped him.

‘That’s if Eva even is who you say she is,’ he said, squaring up to Jan.

‘Don’t you dare say her name again,’ he said in a very low voice.

‘Eva’s probably just some Arco whore. Definitely pretty enough,’ Pao taunted.

The man might have built up muscle mass performing hard labour, but he’d never had to run exhausted for days on end. Jan’s fist caught his temple, collapsing him in a moment. Tuva’s foot smashed into Jan’s back. He folded over, spun and swung a fist at her jaw. There was a crunch and Tuva recoiled, spitting something onto the deckplate.

‘You’re a traitor.’

‘Hey, the wastelander’s alright -’ someone said, and there was the beginning of an argument around Jan. He groaned, trying to regain his breath, and rose to his knees. Tuva aimed another blow, grinning fiercely and egged on by the sudden crowd. He moved out of the way and stood, swaying. Pao was still on the ground, groaning and swearing, but Jan was in enough trouble as it was.

‘He’s an Arco spy!’ Tuva shouted over the crowd. ‘He’s working with the prisoner!’

She aimed another blow at Jan but he managed to lunge aside. Her knee swung up and doubled him over.

‘I say we throw him off the tank,’ said Tuva, stamping hard on Jan’s leg. ‘Won’t survive long, not this deep in the jungle.’ He bit back a yell and rolled away. There was an uncertain chorus which died away suddenly. Through his blurred vision Jan couldn’t quite see what was happening.

‘Step away from him,’ came Aurelie’s voice. ‘Everyone except Tuva. I want to speak to you.’

‘Don’t you care about the mission?’ someone said, their voice muffled. Jan thought it was Pao. ‘We can’t trust him!’

Aurelie made a sharp shushing noise, silencing Pao instantly. Jan glanced up as Tuva stepped over him and squared up to the smaller woman. Aurelie suddenly looked very slight, her delicate features contrasting with Tuva’s blunt face. Jan felt a sudden surge of worry and began staggering to his feet.

‘You don’t scare me-’ Tuva started to say. Jan thought he heard her voice falter.

She lunged forwards as if to punch Aurelie. The other woman didn’t move a centimeter, and Tuva never threw the punch. She seemed to deflate, as if afraid. Aurelie moved her face closer to Tuva’s, her whispery voice somehow audible over the groan of the machine.

‘You’re dispensable. Don’t forget that. Never imagine that you could matter. ’

Everyone was white-faced as Tuva took a step back and sat, though to Jan the smaller woman’s threat seemed faintly comical. He didn’t understand just what had passed between all of them.

Aurelie stood for a few more moments, surveying the hushed troops, as though daring one of them to speak. Nobody did. She turned to leave with an air of quiet satisfaction and Jan picked himself up dazedly, hurrying to follow.

He caught up with Aurelie just as she opened the doors to the mess and climbed up a gantry leading to the top deck. The air was humid, the smell of ozone and oil overpowering. Jan stepped away from the edge of the metal stairs upon seeing the sheer drop onto the rapidly scrolling land below.

‘Thanks,’ he said. They climbed together to the deck.

‘Don’t mention it,’ she said, proffering a handkerchief. ‘You’re bleeding,’ she explained, waving in the direction of Jan’s face.

He accepted the handkerchief, holding it up to his nose. He’d hardly noticed the dull pounding from Tuva’s punch.

‘I was in trouble there, and you -’

‘Really, don’t mention it. Stay out of trouble and keep your head above water.’

Aurelie’s lips twitched, as if aware of some vast irony. Jan followed her to the stairs, descending towards a part of the tank he hadn’t seen before.

‘I should not have left you alone with Pao and Tuva - they’re animals, but occasionally useful,’ she said after they’d walked a few more paces together. ‘You may as well follow me. Christo wants to have a word with you, and now’s as good a time as any.’

They both descended again into the hissing interior of the huge vehicle, moving towards the prow. They emerged inside a room he hadn’t seen before. Christo stood alone in the centre of a cramped, machine-filled space, dressed in heavy overalls and holding a large welding torch up to a strange machine. Aurelie led Jan down the gantry, stepping lightly over the uneven metal.

‘Is that a spaceship? It looks a bit… small,’ Jan mumbled, wondering if he ought to be more impressed. ‘Are you going to fight the Dyn with that?’

When there was no reply he turned to face Aurelie but she’d already vanished. He heard her retreating footsteps disappearing up the gantry.

‘She does tend to do that,’ Christo laughed, tapping his forehead. ‘Always focussed on the plan. So intense, like we’re all just shadows around her feet.’

‘Yeah,’ Jan said absently, descending the stairs and stepping towards Christo. ‘So, is it a spaceship?’

The craft was a four-metre shell of dull metal made of dozens of interlocking plates, with a few windows set into the sides and a complicated, thresher-like arrangement of rotors making up what he assumed was its back end. Gaps in the outer plating revealed a schizoid combination of primitive machinery and things Jan didn’t recognise at all.

Christo laughed, prising open a section of the hull with a crowbar as long as his arm. His muscles visibly strained with the effort.

‘This is a bathyscaphe.’

‘A bath escape?’

‘A submarine.’

Jan still stared, uncomprehending. Christo sighed in exasperation.

‘It’s a boat designed to go underwater, very deep underwater.’

‘So it’s a boat that sinks? It’s actually meant to sink? That doesn’t sound safe.’ Jan had never been very keen on boats.

‘It isn’t, but not for the reasons you’re thinking.’

‘What do you mean?’

Christo sighed, setting the heavy crowbar down on the deckplate with a clatter.

‘This,’ he rapped hard on the hull. ‘Is my great creation. Well… others helped. It’s the reason for all this circus, for taking this machine and chaining up the Dyn. It was all cover, protection. I needed a place to build this and deliver it safely to the ocean.’

‘And how will that help us defeat the Dyn?’

‘Could you give me a hand?’ asked Christo changing the subject. ‘Walk round to the tank and hand me the hose.’

When Jan had the pipe connected up, something thick and gloopy started to stream out and into the mesh of ducts underneath the skin of the submarine. Jan cursed as some of the substance spilled out onto the floor.

‘Biofuel,’ Christo explained. ‘Similar enough to oil - we need it to provide buoyancy control since it’s nearly incompressible even under enormous pressure and barely expands when you heat it. That way we can use it for temperature control as well. This stuff can be warmed like radiator oil, which we’ll need because down on the abyssal plain water can actually cool below freezing. We’ll attach the bags of lead ballast in a moment. They’ll control our descent.’

Jan tried to look as though he understood, but it was difficult. He’d never had the chance to discover such things for himself.

‘Then, we’ll attach the outboard floats and solid fuel rockets,’ Christo finished.

‘That’s a joke, right?’

‘Just shut off the hose,’ Christo laughed. ‘Some things are best left as surprises.’

Jan pulled hard on the lever and the flow subsided. He turned to see Christo manhandling a huge plate with the revolution’s logo emblazoned on it. A heavy steel mesh bag underneath was empty. Jan rushed forward to help heave the curved steel slab into its slot. When the plate thudded home, Christo snapped the dogs closed and it melded seamlessly with the hull.

‘When we met you told me that we were going to tear the Dyn out of the sky,’ Jan said. ‘It was crazy then, and I guess it still is. So what is going on?’

‘Look Jan, most of the crew doesn’t even know as much as you do. Compartmentalisation; Aurelie says that’s the key. The less anyone knows, the less they can tell Arco if this all goes south.’

‘But why dive under the sea when they’re in orbit; are you searching for something?’

‘Maybe,’ Christo laughed. He reached to the ground and grabbed a heavy lead ball, the size of a watermelon. He swung it into the steel bag on the hull with a grunt, then turned back to Jan. ‘You’re sharper than you look.’

‘Christo, are you compartmentalised too?’

‘Not as far as I know!’ Christo laughed, heaving another metal ball into the wire bag bolted to the hull. ‘We need to rely on each other. I trust you. Aurelie and I need you to trust me. I’m already working out the crew roster and you’ve proven more reliable than most, when you’re not getting into fights or sneaking upstairs to spy on our prisoner.’

‘You’re having me followed.’

‘Of course. Don’t give me that look; you haven’t failed me yet. Not unless you tried to untie the Dyn or threw the first punch in that fight.’

‘I did, but Pao started it. He insulted my daughter.’

‘Well, I suppose that’s forgivable. She’s no longer with you?’

On an odd impulse, Jan stepped away from the pipe and cleaned his hand on the jumpsuit, reaching inside his pocket to produce the photograph.

‘Sweet,’ Christo smiled weakly. ‘Don’t worry, there’s no need to say any more.’

Jan paused; the pain was like an old wound, easy enough to ignore but there all the same. He had to tell someone.

‘Eva was always smarter and faster to learn than anyone. She knew more than me or her teachers and she always loved machines most of all. In the end I took her to a conurbation to be tested for an engineering job. I had to help her escape the wasteland, any way I could.’

‘What happened?’

‘She got scared when they told her she wouldn’t be able to see me again. She found her way back, somehow. She told me they’d been taking all the kids that passed some test away from the conurbation. Arco wanted her back. It was so sudden; a whole army smashed our village to rubble. I lost her in the confusion; maybe she was kidnapped, maybe she got out.’

‘Really? Arco doesn’t commit massacres like that, not unless they’re utterly desperate.’

‘You haven't lived in the wasteland - Arco may not do these things but their proxies don’t care,’ Jan said bitterly. ‘What could they possibly have wanted with her?’

‘I don’t know. We’ll probably never find out, all you can do now is avenge her.’

Jan nodded fiercely as Christo set down his wrench.

‘We’re done here. Go upstairs and make yourself useful. And please, stay out of trouble.’

Just as Jan turned to leave, something on the photograph caught his eye. He turned away from Christo, doing his best to smooth the oil and anonymous detritus off the now hopelessly faded sheet of paper. He turned it over and saw something scrawled on the back. It looked like a scribble, written in an unfamiliar kind of ink, but there seemed to be some hint of structure in it, like a complex glyph in some unknown language. It didn’t look like anything a human would write. He squinted and the writing seemed to pop out, stereographically. It was Americano, written in clumsy capitals, in a strange, drifting layout;

‘I KNOW HER’

Chapter 11: Dissonance

Corbin handed Vash a sheaf of papers as the helicopter reached a comfortable cruising altitude and sped out of Conurbation One, following the course of an arterial linear arcology that snaked north-east along the ragged coast. Vash leafed through the printouts, scanning over the profiles of the dozen or so special operatives detailed within.

'Their record is certainly impeccable. Do you trust them?' Vash asked, leaning in towards Corbin so as to make himself heard over the drone of the helicopter's twin turboprops.

'As much as I trust anyone, yes,' Corbin replied, smiling reassuringly. Vash knew the man well enough to recognise the remark as high praise. 'In my old line of work you had to have one another’s backs. The politicking of Arco can be vicious but out in the field...'

'I sometimes forget who you were. When did you leave to join the Internal branch - it must have been three, four years now?'

'Don't remind them of that!' Corbin laughed. 'And certainly don't tell them about my cushy Directorship - they'll mock me enough as it is. But in all seriousness, that kind of bond won't fade. I have their loyalty.'

Vash nodded. There was no time to assemble another team, and he didn’t want to test his authority by ordering directors to supply more troops, but for all that he tried to rationalise it, Vash could not dispel the sense of disquiet he felt. He passed the sheaf of printouts back to Corbin before turning to watch the world rushing by beneath them.

Slate-grey waves beat against the coastal levees, water sluicing down into sheltered overflow channels where it was gathered for desalination or directed towards the big thorium plants that powered the hulking form of the linear arcology beyond. From this height the vast structure still conferred a sense of the order imagined when it had been built, a couple of generations into the Dynic occupation, when such feats were still possible. In reality little was left of the original but the superstructure; the carcass of some leviathan of carbon allotropes and secrete, washed ashore in a storm. Only bleached bone had survived decay and the predation of scavengers.

'You mentioned a dragon's tooth; the symbol painted on the tank,' Corbin said at length.

'That's what it looked like,' Vash replied, not turning from the window.

Under the gathering gloom of the tempestuous evening sky the vast bank of the arcology lit up with a cold brilliance, although great stretches remained shuttered and dark, with small fires and the odd huddle of lights the only sign of occupation.

'You thought it might have some significance. You said it could be important,' Corbin prompted. ‘You said it might be more important than anything.’

Vash could feel the pressure of Corbin's eyes on him. He was certain the man knew he was concealing something. The silence stretched.

Vash trusted Corbin, even enjoyed his company; his friend's tone was conversational. So why did this feel like an interrogation? The casual tone might have fooled someone less acquainted with the man’s moods, but Corbin was already hungry for information.

Not for the first time since seeing a dragon's tooth emblazoned on the vehicle of a quixotic revolutionary movement, Vash wondered whether he should just tell Corbin what he suspected.

'I thought I recognised it from somewhere. It's a befitting symbol for a militant group, even if it’s no more than a coincidence, don't you think?'

'Skeleton warriors and dragon's teeth,' Corbin mused. 'All a bit portentous, isn't it?' he gave an easy smile. ‘It’s as if the Revolution is announcing itself to us.’

What was it that stopped him from saying more? A fear that Corbin would leap to conclusions of his own? A selfish desire to keep the revelation to himself - perhaps that symbol had been intended for him specifically? Or a sense that Corbin would reveal it all to truly be nothing more than coincidence?

‘They've hardly shown a predilection for the conventional.'

'You could say that,' Corbin laughed.

How long had Vash waited for some promise from the past, a reassurance that there had been a plan that he might play a part in, instead of desperately improvising? He knew that to be able to relinquish even a fraction of the responsibility he bore with clear conscience would grant him profound relief. He also knew he shouldn’t fixate on such a faint possibility - instead he would focus on the evidence he had available and make the best decisions he could. It was too early yet to call the developing knot of intentions in his head a plan, but the beginnings of one? Maybe.

There was another lull, both men momentarily lost in their own thoughts.

'Why the secrecy, sir? I mean, I understand that the kidnapping of one of them is a delicate matter, but why the insistence that you handle this personally?’ Corbin asked. ‘I would be far more suited to leading this operation. I'll reiterate my offer...'

'Strictly speaking Liar to Animals would probably object to you knowing the amount that you do already but - '

'Liar to Animals?' Corbin interrupted, taking the bait.

'K'txl, the voice on the phone - it's the meaning of her name. I can't help but feel something was lost in translation there,' Vash smiled wryly.

'Definitely not the most reassuring name for something speaking to us on behalf of its species,' grinned Corbin, warming to the theme. ‘So what does it have to hide?’

'Even the Dyn aren't a monolithic bloc, for all that they appear to be. My becoming Ambassador was the direct result of her own rise to power within the firmament,' Vash said. 'Suffice to say there is a faction that opposes her and the loss of her ‘heir’, on the surface of the planet she’s meant to control, would be a major blow to her legitimacy.’

'Surely any opposing faction could have seen all this from orbit? And thousands of people will know by now what happened.'

'We simply have to hope that nobody else knows enough to realise the bigger picture - merely being capable of seeing this all unfold from orbit is besides the point. You have to know where to look in the first place.'

Corbin considered this for a moment then nodded as though it confirmed some suspicion of his.

'So why should we care if our current alien overlord is replaced by another? Let me guess, it threatened to smite another couple of cities if we didn't rescue it's progeny?' asked Corbin, flippantly. His grin faded when he saw Vash's expression.

'If we fail and K'txl is toppled, everyone on Earth dies.’

'And why should we believe the threats of something that refers to itself as Liar to Animals?'

Vash paused. The arcology they were flying over now was utterly dark, difficult to distinguish from the mountainous coast. The region had been evacuated following a nuclear accident several decades back and the exclusion zone remained utterly devoid of any significant human presence. It was thus ideal for their purposes - there was scant chance of discovery out here. They must be nearing the rendezvous.

'K'txl...' He searched for the right words. 'K'txl spoke through a girl - their minds were linked, connected using old technology the Dyn have managed to reverse engineer. K'txl claimed she had done this so that she could understand us, in order to resolve our differences. She told me that she wanted peace.’

'Surely that would have been easier before they massacred several hundred million people and turned our own world into a godforsaken prison?'

'I don't think they have any intuitive grasp of the abstract concepts that come naturally to us,' Vash said carefully, trying a different angle of approach. 'You know, things like justice or ethics. K’txl spoke of them as though they were some kind of sickness - a mass hallucination was how she referred to it. She seemed particularly afraid of universal morality; that by some objective measure an action could be deemed to be fundamentally moral, or immoral.'

Corbin didn’t say a word, he just shook his head, disbelieving.

'K'txl asked me if I thought she was evil,' said Vash. Corbin let out a bark of bitter laughter. 'She said that we would have seen their nature as something that had to be righted, that we would not be able to tolerate their existence. You were right, you know - Dynic technology really was the more primitive. So they invaded preemptively, using the only advantage they had and have held us hostage ever since.'

'And you're willing to take it on its word?'

'What reason would K'txl have to lie, Corbin? To compel me to rescue the next in her line? Why bother with such an elaborate threat? There are few logical motives to invade across interstellar space, even with an impossible artefact like the Other Moon to improve the logistics. I don't claim to be able to read an alien's intentions, but if that machinery translated anything then what it conveyed most forcefully was fear.’

A solitary flare was burning out on one of the upper tiers and the helicopter began its descent. Vash leant in again, holding Corbin’s gaze.

‘K'txl claims to seek understanding, but having heard what I have there is no doubt in my mind that there are Dyn up there that given half the chance would wipe this planet clean and deal with the consequences later. So yes, we take K'txl on her word.'

Interlude: Unmake the World

They had discovered alien life before, of course. One did not expand across such an unknowably large distance and fail to find habitable worlds. But nothing like this. The hives covered the planet’s surface; swarming, seething masses of them. Even orbit, so serene above the surface of the homeworld, was choked with them. Further away, lights in the dark indicated ship drives, flitting around the edge of the system. They all felt a deepening sense of claustrophobia as the armada passed through the gate, a wretchedness verging on suffocation.

They had found the outer edge of the new species’ expansion years ago, an isolated ship riding a beam of subnuclear fire. Their armada had waited, not really knowing how to begin communicating with such an alien race. But they didn’t have to wait long; the explorer ship remained silent for a few days and then broadcast a perfectly formed reply in their own language. This ability was, needless to say, impossible. As they began to understand the content of the explorer’s messages, that promised kinds of sharing and mind-alteration strange and obscene, the aliens’ technological powers became more and more apparent.

The various messages were untangled. Each new idea was more strange and terrible than the last. These aliens lived within a dream, motivated by things that didn’t really exist, supporting their insanities with godlike powers. Conflict was inevitable. The foreign vessel extinguished itself before it could be captured. But all was not lost.

They assembled all known ships - every ship ever built, everything that could carry a weapon from every corner of known space. Old conflicts and rivalries were ignored, fading into irrelevance in the face of such a titanic struggle. Coordination was simple and immediate. It was not a matter of discussion or cooperation. Rather, it was simply the case that new information became available and everyone, everywhere came to the same conclusion simultaneously. They had the advantage, if they took this last, desperate step. Their way of life could survive.

The alien home system was dense with replicating machines, but they waited inertly and responded far too slowly. The route taken enabled a surprise attack close to the alien homeworld. They possessed few weapons in the instant of meeting, but the capacity to create them had not been forgotten. Surprise was necessary.

More messages were beamed by the aliens; demands for unity and understanding where none could exist, requests and pleas, digital pulses that seemed to want to bypass their minds entirely.

They ignored all these, for their course had been decided upon since they had received the first messages from the lone explorer that had crossed their path. The logic was clear to all who observed; they could risk servility, extinction or corruption or strike fast and deal with the aftermath later, for these two species could ultimately never coexist in the same universe.

They did not wish to exterminate, merely to contain, to quarantine, so that understanding could take place on their own terms. Maximal force was required. Projectiles were deployed, targeting centres of communication and the spindly webs strung in orbit; any resistance, any blizzard of kinetics or electronic warfare was dealt with by deorbiting a habitat. Asteroidal material was flung at the planet and its single large moon. Their command of the alien language was marshalled and used to broadcast an ultimatum to the rest of the system, showing that there would be no compromise, that opposition was to stand down or death would come to all.

The aliens understood.

Chapter 12: Beachhead

Jan sat on the edge of his gently swaying hammock, hunched over, sweat cooling on his skin. He thumbed the corners of the photograph cradled in his hands.

I know her.

He read those three words scrawled across the back of the photograph, as though if only he could scrutinise them hard enough, more information might somehow be revealed.

I know her.

The implication of those words had been enough to occupy his every waking thought. He had done his best to absorb himself in his duties the day before, but it was menial, repetitive work and his mind kept circling back to them, trapped in some torturous, recursive loop. He found himself wondering whether she was safe, where she might be, what she would look like after all these years and then asking those same questions again and again in lieu of any available answers. When night came and Jan finally lay down they only grew more urgent. He had never allowed himself to even hope that his daughter might still be alive; better that than have to imagine her caged like an animal. Sleep had not come easy despite his exhaustion, and when it did it was fractured, punctuated by nightmares of villages burning and riot-armoured Arco troops.

A small part of him still didn’t dare believe those words. They had been written by the Dyn, Jan was sure of it - but could he trust it? With a sickening realisation he knew he would interrogate the hostage at the first opportunity. Jan recognised this was a terrible idea for any number of reasons, yet such concerns were somehow immaterial, paling in comparison to that single overriding imperative. He had to know.

The harsh dawn klaxon dragged Jan from his reverie. He packed his hammock away but didn’t join the others for breakfast. Instead he climbed up to the open deck, seeking one final moment of solitude before the coming day, the final day of the Revolution.

Dynic life died back near the coast. The alien flora couldn’t cope with the salt-laden air that blew in off the ocean. It was clear and fresh, like nothing he had ever experienced. Jan breathed deeply, focusing on the sensation of the crawler rocking beneath him and the breeze on his skin.

A firm hand clapped him on the shoulder.

'Seems I'm not the only one in a reflective mood,' Christo remarked.

Jan smiled faintly, his mind elsewhere. Christo seemed to understand. Something in his demeanour changed and without saying another word he moved next to Jan, standing more still and silent than Jan had known. In that instant, he was not Christo as the histories would remember him. He was diminished, somehow.

‘This is what makes it all worthwhile. The chance to breathe free under an open sky,’ Christo said at length.

Jan looked into the open sky and saw a faint glint. The Dyn ships were low enough to be visible in daylight.

‘But first we’ve got to try and breathe free underwater?’

‘Not me, my place is up here. Now it’s time for Aurelie to complete the mission.’

‘But you want me to go down in that can? It doesn’t look safe at all.’

'Oh, it’s far from safe. But up here, things will be no better. The scouts inform me the coast is nothing like the maps depict,' Christo said, an edge of concern creeping into his voice. 'Old impactor strike apparently. We're going to be completely exposed in that bay - can't just roll right down to the sea.'

'So what's the plan?' asked Jan expectantly. Christo laughed.

'Oh, we're more or less out of plan now. End of the line and all that. We get the bathyscaphe into the sea - that's all. Help Pao and the other engineers get it down when we get there.'

Jan nodded, but Christo was already striding away.

The crawler reached the coast just moments later and Jan was confronted by a scene more alien than any he had ever seen. The world fell away and beyond the ocean, devoid of any sign of life, stretched out to infinity. There was a jolt as the crawler’s titanic brakes finally engaged, its prow coming to rest barely ten metres from the cliff edge. The Revolution had run out of land to flee across.

An improvised crane was set up on the cliff edge to lower people and equipment, whilst others abseiled down. Jan was one of the last to descend, riding the rickety improvised platform down to the ground with the bulk of the bathyscaphe, still incomplete beneath a tarpaulin. A beach had gathered in the bight and sloped away into the sea, where the waves beat against the shore, throwing up arcs of dirty grey spray.

He scanned the sky instinctively. There was an edge to everyone’s interactions, a growing fear at being cornered without shelter and hemmed in by unforgiving walls of rock at the edge of the world. Yet they had seen nothing since the flight from the outskirts of Fifteen and reconnaissance reliably informed them the Arco troops that followed did so at a respectful distance - half a day's drive at least. Shapes circled above, but they were gulls, not aircraft.

It all seemed too easy; that was what worried them.

Aurelie stepped lightly off the platform behind Jan, appearing as if from nowhere. Wordlessly she helped him and the others detach the platform from the crane and secure it to a makeshift sled.

As he fumbled with one of the clasps he suddenly became aware that she was studying him. He glanced up, straight-faced, meeting her gaze. Jan busied himself checking the bathyscaphe was secured and the moment passed without comment. It took a dozen of them to drag the sled laboriously down the beach.

'What is this thing?' hissed one, tugging at the tarpaulin.

'It's the weapon,' offered another.

'It's need to know,' said an engineer through gritted teeth, looking pointedly at Aurelie.

She paid them no heed, straightening the moment they’d rolled it down to the surf.

‘Anyone on guard duty or otherwise unassigned, go back to the crawler,’ she said, waving back to where it was parked, prow just visible over the lip of the cliff. ‘We need it manned, just in case. We should be on our way before then.’

'And if they come?'

‘If they come we'll be the first to die,’ somebody muttered from next to him. Aurelie’s expression didn’t waver.

‘If they come, you're to hold them off for as long as possible. It's a more defensible position than down here. You are in no more danger than the rest of us. We all have our part to play,’ she finished artlessly.

There was a brief pause, a moment where it almost seemed like the men would disobey, then they trudged back up the beach without another word. Jan wondered if he was supposed to follow, but Aurelie breezed past him without a sideways glance.

The revolutionaries maneuvered their handful of cars into a perimeter around the bathyscaphe, assembling makeshift barricades from empty fuel drums and assorted debris. Others dug shallow trenches in the shingle, or set up heavy weapons, machine-guns and mortars. Jan stood in the midst of this hive of activity and looked around.

What was it Aurelie had said? Just in case. But this wasn't just precaution, this was staging. This was the backdrop for a last stand, a heroic but ultimately futile final battle, like the stories he'd loved as a child. What if that was all this had ever been? Christo had said it himself - his only legacy would be his memory. To such a man it didn't ultimately matter whether he succeeded or not, so long as he had his noble death.

Jan had seen enough friends die as martyrs for the sake of someone else's cause. He'd sworn he'd never make the same mistake, yet he so nearly had. He didn't hold it against Christo, he didn't doubt for a moment that the man was anything less than sincere, but they all had their own crusades to fight.

He found the Dyn hostage behind one of the cars, already unloaded and pinned down, momentarily forgotten. Doing his best to appear as though he had every right to be there, Jan walked over to it, fighting the instinctive fear and revulsion as he squatted down as close as he dared. It might be nothing more than a lie, but the note the Dyn had written for him couldn’t just be ignored. Not if it might lead back to Eva.

‘The message you sent me - what did you mean, you know of her? You know my daughter? You know where she is?’ he whispered urgently, the words spilling forth. Jan was well aware of how desperate he sounded, but he couldn’t help himself. Did the Dyn even understand him; could it even speak? Either way, he didn't have much time.

‘I remember…’ the voice was muffled and seemed to emerge not from the Dyn’s mouth, but from somewhere within its neck. It sounded as though the alien was carefully piecing together every syllable. ‘Eva.’

Jan’s breath caught in his throat, struck dumb by the sheer impossibility before him. The alien couldn’t have heard that name spoken by him or anyone else. All it had seen was the picture.

‘I can trade. For mutual benefit,’ the Dyn continued.

'I can't release you - they'll kill us both before we make it off the beach,' Jan hissed, glancing over his shoulder.

'Don't want release… trade favours. Help me, and you will see her again.’

'Help you how?' Jan asked.

'You will take me with you. Under the ocean.' A sudden unease gripped Jan.

'How can you possibly know about that?' But the Dyn merely shook it's head from side to side.

'Answers later. When you have done what I ask.'

The creature was toying with him - it must know that such a request was impossible. He had no time for this. Jan reached for his dotbow.

‘Christo needs you alive and he needs you captive, but he never said he needed you whole. Do you understand?’ he snarled. 'You don't get to make demands.'

He slammed the dobtow down stock-first, deliberately missing the restrained limb of the Dyn prisoner by centimeters. Sibilant laughter emanated from deep within the creature’s throat. Like the voice it had an artificial, electronic quality. Not the Dyn’s true speech; the product of a device.

‘You cannot threaten me,' it chided. 'Not if you want to see your daughter.' Jan raised the weapon again, to strike for real.

'I will leave you here to die on this beach. Do you think they're going to keep you alive a moment longer than necessary?'

It shook its head again in that same strange imitation of a human gesture. The synthetic voice, when it came, was as flat and impassive as ever.

'I am hostage because I am next in line. I am loved. Mother does not want to kill me. You love your daughter Eva. If you don't want them to kill your daughter, you will need my help. We can... cooperate.’

'You evil shit,' Jan spat, struggling to get the words out. Yet he felt his arm go limp, letting the dotbow clatter to the ground.

The Dyn said nothing more. It's head tilted side-on, it regarded him with a single bottomless pit of an eye, as though waiting for a proper answer. He was no closer to knowing than before. But what if Eva really was out there? Jan gulped, pushed his hair back from his eyes.

'How can I know that you're telling the truth?' he asked. He already knew the answer.

'You can’t,' it said. Jan took a deep breath, willing himself to make another choice, but his mind was already made up.

‘Ok. I’ll do it,’ Jan whispered.

Just as he was standing a powerful blow caught him in the back of his legs, knocking them out from underneath him. He hit his head on the shingle as he fell.

'Do what, wastelander?' Tuva's voice. She was on him in an instant, pinning his arms behind his back, forcing his head down into the shingle. The Dyn was as motionless as it had been when he'd found it. Slowly that black, pitiless eye shut.

'Pao, I got him, get the others!' she called.

'I knew it! I knew you were up on the deck that night, I knew it!' she continued, turning back to him. 'Oh you are so dead.' The other revolutionaries bound his arms and legs whilst Tuva looked on.

'What did you and our mutual friend talk about then, huh?' Jan knew better than to say anything. He couldn't talk his way out of this one.

She rummaged through his pockets until she found the photograph. There was a moment of awful anticipation.

'I know her... So that's what it's about. You were ready to betray your own species for an empty promise to see her again, right?' She crouched down and holding it in front of Jan’s face, slowly tore the photo to shreds. She spread her hands theatrically, scattering the fragments over the stones. ‘That'll teach me to never be too trusting.'

Laughing bitterly, she sauntered over to the Dyn and swung a kick at it's head.

'This even true, Zog? You dissected his daughter or something?' The Dyn remained unresponsive. 'You not talking either? Fine! Whatever, it’s not like it matters anyway. Let's get you to Aurelie.'

Jan failed to hide his shock.

'Yeah, I know right? Surprised me as well. She was the one who suggested I go find you. I don't like her, I'm not sure I really trust her either but I tell you what, she's sharp. You have to give her that.'

The revolutionaries dragged him roughly across the beach, throwing him to the ground at Aurelie's feet.

'Make him stand,' she said. They did as they were told. She stood motionless, hands clasped behind her back, expression unreadable and desires unknowable. Give Tuva her way and she'd beat him to death. With Aurelie, Jan simply had no idea what to expect next. She was as alien to him as the Dyn were.

'You have your own agenda, Jan. Under almost any other circumstances it would be an admirable one,' Aurelie began softly. Her tone hardened again. 'Here it's just a liability.'

She was sentencing him. Desperately he cast his eyes around and wracked his brain for a plan of action.

'We have all lost people. I have lost more than you can possibly imagine.'

She walked over to one of the crates and picked up a small handgun.

'I gave you a chance, Jan. I gave you a choice...'

This time when she looked up at him there was genuine regret in those eyes. He watched her hands load the gun, moving with an automatic fluidity, faster than Jan would have thought possible. She raised the gun.

'But you can't be allowed to jeopardise the mission.’

‘Give me a final request, please,’ he pleaded. She acquiesced. ‘As I won’t live to see the Revolution, tell me, how do you plan to bring down the Dyn?’

She saw what he was doing immediately, but it was already too late. The revolutionaries that had gathered around them, drawn to the commotion, were muttering and exchanging quizzical looks with one another.

‘It’s not like there’s any risk of infiltrators reporting it all back to Arco now, right?’ Jan continued seizing on Aurelie’s hesitation. ‘What’s the bathyscaphe for? What’s so deep underwater? How’s everyone getting off this beach?’

A rising chorus of dissent threatened to drown Jan out. It was as if a spell had broken.

‘Enough!’ Aurelie shouted. She leveled the gun at his forehead. ‘He’s trying to turn us against each other. Jan, I -’

‘I get that,’ came Tuva’s voice from behind him. ‘Go ahead, shoot him, the bastard deserves it. But he has a point. What actually is the plan? We’ve all put our faith in you and Christo, we’ve fought for the cause. The least you can do is tell us what we’re doing here.’

‘There’s a weapon, at the bottom of an ocean trench. A weapon that will help us bring down the firmament -’

‘Yeah I figured as much. But there’s room for what, half a dozen people on that thing? How’re the rest of us getting off this beach?’ Aurelie turned to Tuva, well aware that the crowd was swelling up behind her.

‘The Dynic hostage will be left on the surface, granting leverage to those not on the bathyscaphe. We’ll rendezvous at a pre-arranged, secure location.’

‘Lies!’ interrupted a new voice. ‘If the Dyn are at risk, how long will one hostage really stave them off?’

‘You’re leaving us here to die!’ yelled another.

Aurelie raised the gun, firing it into the sky and in that instant the crowd lunged. She seemed to blur, lashing out at two men and sending them sprawling. She was fast, movements coordinated and effective, but there were simply too many of them. Jan, kneeling on the ground dazedly, barely spotted what happened next. Someone swung a rifle, catching her in the back of the head with the stock, sending her sprawling and within moments she was engulfed by the mob. He backpedalled frantically, landing hard on the shingle. More revolutionaries were dashing towards the brawl, trying to pull people away from Aurelie or each other. Someone yelled for help.

A second shot rang out.

‘Comrades!’ cried Christo, leaping down from the crane, flanked by two sentries. The mob withdrew, dissolving into its constituent parts. Aurelie stood, dusting herself down, dabbing tentatively at a cut on her head. She reached for her fallen handgun, raising it again.

‘Are we going to die?’ someone shouted to Christo; half angry, half plaintive.

Christo shrugged, as if the matter were of no consequence. He lowered the shotgun and walked slowly towards Aurelie, standing protectively to shield her, holding the shotgun low as if daring the crowd to approach closer.

‘Maybe,’ he said. ‘Probably.’

‘You lying bastard -’ Pao replied, shoving his way through the crowd.

‘I never lied to any of you,’ Christo said with a knowing smile. ‘I think you all knew, on some level, just what lay at the end of this journey.

The mob seemed to deflate a little. Even Pao stopped his advance.

‘This is the last step,’ Christo boomed, his voice echoing off the cliffs. ‘This is the day of the Revolution! This is the day we end the Dynic occupation!’

‘Yes, they will come for us, but if we stand together, they will not stop us in the end. That is all that matters. The mission is all that matters. The rumours you have heard are true. We are launching the bathyscaphe and its crew to search for something hidden. A secret, buried half a dozen kilometers beneath the ocean and forgotten by time. I cannot hint at what, or how I know. But there are things on this aged, beautiful, battered world that are as far beyond the Dyn’s comprehension as the Dyn are beyond ours. We’re going to destroy them, pure and simple.’

There was a collective intake of breath. Even Jan raised himself up curiously.

‘When you joined me I made no pretense that the cause would not require sacrifice. So many have already sacrificed everything to get us where we are today, on the very cusp of smashing the firmament like glass. Today we look to the heavens and see that same scrawl of alien constellations we were born under, spelling subjugation, deprivation. But tomorrow, if we succeed, we will see nothing but infinite space. All this will be no more than a memory.’

Christo raised his hands in a gesture almost like prayer, and his voice became lower, less boisterous and more plaintive.

‘Can’t you feel the moment? Right now the world stands on a needlepoint, with every word and deed performed here echoing forever through history. Is it worth dying to set the world right? I say it is. And if it comes to that, I will be fighting beside you. But what good is a freedom fighter who isn’t free? So I ask for the last time, the same question I asked all of you - are you with me?’

There was an uncertain chorus that seemed to grow in confidence, a few defiant raised fists. It wasn’t the stirring cheer Christo had hoped for, but it was something solid and definite. The cynical part of Jan wondered if they hadn’t all already realised there was no hope of escape back up the cliffs. At least they’d forgotten about him, for the moment.

‘I think we’ve all stood around long enough,’ Christo said, demeanour shifting instantly as he holstered the shotgun. ‘Let’s get back to work.’

He frowned, noticing the crowd’s eyes drifting elsewhere, their lack of response.

Jan gaped up as the platform began descending from the cliff’s edge. Any thought that it might be a returning crewmember from the crawler disappeared as the platform descended, the figure astride it becoming distinct. The platform landed on the shingle in a silence broken only by the crashing of waves. The solitary figure was dressed in a long overcoat and had his hands raised above his head. He began walking calmly towards the gathered revolutionaries.

‘I surrender,’ said the ruler of the world.

Chapter 13: Rendezvous

Vash studied the latest image of their target. Cliffs divided land from sea, men and materiel clustered on the beach below. The crawler lay at the cliff edge, the symbol painted on its top deck still clearly visible, its meaning apparent only to him.

'When was this taken?' he asked, glancing up.

'Not two minutes ago,' replied the Enforcer nearest to him; the head of the pack, as far as Vash could discern. Dias, according to the name on the shoulder of his fatigues. ‘From orbit?’ Vash asked, momentarily perplexed. Dias shook his head.

‘High altitude drone, solar powered. They shouldn’t be able to see it. I thought you knew, sir - Corbin had it requisitioned for us. Better to not have to rely on the Dyn for recon.’

Beneath them equatorial jungle the colour of a bruise stretched away to the horizon, with Dynic flora already recolonising the swathe of destruction cut by the crawler. Within a couple of days there would be no indication it had passed this way.

'When do we get there?'

'Not long now, only another ten minutes of flight time, though we'll be landing further out. Flying low I reckon we can get within three kilometres of the coast before the risk of one of their scouts spotting us - '

'We'll have to take that chance. Get us within two.'

'Sir, we'd risk losing the element of surprise. They're not going anywhere. They've lowered all their equipment down onto that beach and they’re digging in,' Dias said slowly, stopping just short of disrespect.

Vash could imagine how he felt, to have responsibility for some clueless civilian foisted on him, worse still, ostensibly the most powerful man on the planet. To their credit, the Enforcers had taken his intrusion in their stride, but these men were used to operating with considerable autonomy.

'That's what I'm concerned about,' said Vash. 'Tell me, if you were going to make a last stand, would you choose an exposed beach hemmed in by cliffs on one side and the sea on the other?'

'They’re not going to think like us, we're professionals. Way I see it these rebs stole a crawler, took a Dyn hostage then panicked when they realised they were in way over their heads. They've been running ever since,' Dias offered.

'Strange to run straight for the sea though, don't you think? What does that look like to you?' Vash asked, pointing to an object down near the shoreline, half obscured by tarpaulin. Dias shrugged.

'Some kind of vehicle?'

'It looks like a submarine to me. Someone's not intending to stay on that beach.' The Enforcer looked closer, then spoke into his radio.

'Rocha, take us down, close as you can.'

'Copy that,' came the pilot’s response.

Moments later they angled away from the path cut by the crawler. The hills rose up around them as they shed altitude. The Enforcers began their final checks, securing helmets and body armour, unloading and reloading weapons. Vash massaged his temples and tried to focus.

They had departed the ruins of the linear arcology in the early morning, after only a few broken hours of sleep. Whilst the Enforcers had quickly lapsed back into unconsciousness once they were underway, with an ease that spoke of years of experience, Vash had been unable to do so. Of course, it helped that they were ignorant of what was truly at stake.

The world balanced on a knife-edge, the consequences of a single misstep more dire, more readily apparent than Vash could ever remember. The least risky course of action would be to follow Liar to Animal's diktat, to save her heir, pin the rebels on the beach and let the column of Enforcers still in pursuit mop them up before they could melt back into the jungle.

Vash had quickly learnt it was better not to take risks - a coward’s rationalisation, as some would have it - but one didn’t casually gamble with the lives of billions of people. Yet if he took the safest course of action, the obvious course of action, he might be denying the people of Earth their best hope of ending the Dynic occupation. That symbol, the jagged tooth, so familiar now that he could sketch it from memory, called to him across the centuries.

Roughly two hundred million people had died last year. It seemed an incongruous, almost trivial fact. Yet it hadn’t always been so. Vash remembered a world without death, yet now it took everything they had to merely forestall that toll’s inexorable rise. It was even worse in the years when the pandemics were bad. There were only so many people you could support on a single planet at a given level of development, and Arco was beginning to run up against hard limits.

If Vash again placated the Dyn, within less than a century he would condemn more people to short, miserable lives than he would save. Faced with the chance to end the occupation, he had for the first time in decades considered this world as an outsider and found it unacceptable. They were in the grip of a slow-burning disaster, a grinding Malthusian attrition of living standards; that it had continued for nearly two centuries didn’t change anything. Preserving things the way they were was not a free action. Vash knew he was talking himself into the decision, yet that didn’t matter. The time had come to take a risk.

Rocha brought them down in the centre of a deserted wastelander settlement, the forms of the surrounding buildings still discernible beneath the false life. The second helicopter landed further out.

'We'll be in constant radio contact,' said Dias as he stepped out. 'Shouldn't be more than a couple of hours but Rocha here will keep you company. You can do… whatever it is that you do once we’ve got the area clear of hostiles.’

'I'll be coming with you,' said Vash firmly.

'With all due respect sir, that won't be necessary. We have our orders, we know what we're doing. We’ll bring you in when we have the Dyn secured.'

'I don't doubt it. But that wasn't a request.' Vash perfunctorily selected a handgun from the rack and followed after Dias. 'I have my own orders to follow, after all.'

Dias forced a smile and protested no further, but Vash knew what he was thinking: you don’t bring your commander-in-chief on a reconnaissance mission.

The Enforcers fanned out, scanning the buildings surrounding them with instinctive, fluid movements. There was no sign of any rebel scouts, at least none that would be revealed by such a cursory search. Vash followed a few meters behind.

He'd only seen the false jungle from the outside before, in satellite imagery or through the windows of a vehicle. It was different when you were immersed in it. Fetid and heady scents hung in the humid air and plants like cancerous growths crowded him. Some pulsed softly with the beat of muscular nutrient pumps, like rudimentary hearts; a queasy blurring of boundaries between plant and animal. False life could not be so easily categorised. But what Vash noticed most of all was the sense of quiet watchfulness, of things moving just beneath the threshold of casual perception. It would have been easy to convince himself that this was an alien world, if it wasn't for the details.

Scattered amongst the knotted tendrils and filaments of false life lay the debris of humanity, abandoned or forgotten the day the settlement had been cleared - relatively recently, by the looks of things. A broken pair of glasses, a lighter, the rusted frame of a bike, a stuffed toy; Vash could picture the people they had once belonged to, driven from their homes. The collateral damage of another claim made by those above. Enforcers had come this way before, riot shields locked together, corralling terrified wastelanders ahead of them. Then on to buses; families arbitrarily divided between conurbations. Those that resisted would be sent to internment camps. Others simply ended up as corpses, and still lay there, mercifully obscured by the dense groundcover. For better or worse, what happened today could end it all.

A body lay across the path, its outline softened by the encroaching plants, empty eye sockets staring blankly at the sky. One by one the Enforcers stepped over it. Without conscious thought Vash found himself kneeling beside the body.

'Sir?' The Enforcers up ahead had realised he'd stopped.

The corpse was small, although beyond that it had decomposed far enough that he could discern nothing else. All he knew was that he should cover it.

'Vash!'

Vash tore a curtain from one of the nearby doors. A pair of wide, green eyes stared back at him. One of the rebels. He couldn't be more than sixteen. A gun shook in his white-knuckled grip.

'Is everything okay, sir?' The Enforcers were turning back.

Run, Vash pleaded. Just go.

'Everything's fine, I just wanted to cover the body,' he called, turning to the approaching Enforcers.

Get as far away from here as you can.

'We need to keep moving. We can’t hang back for you.'

Vash laid the sheet over the corpse. The Enforcers took a few more steps then stopped as he stood and made to follow them. When he glanced back to the doorway, the boy had disappeared.

Rejoining the other Enforcers, they continued to make their way slowly towards the coast, the foliage around them growing increasingly stunted and anemic. After another fifteen minutes of cautious progress, Dias raised his fist, signalling for the others to stop.

‘The forward squad has eyes on the crawler and they’ve confirmed the hostage is down on the beach’ said Dias from Vash’s side. ‘We’re gonna call in an airstrike on the vehicle before advancing further -’

‘I want you to hold position here. Take no further action until I give the order.’

‘Sir, the longer we wait, the more chance they have to discover us,’ Dias replied, as though explaining to a child.

‘I understand, but I have orders from the Dyn to attempt negotiation first,’ Vash lied. ‘If I don’t report back in an hour, then execute whatever plans you’ve prepared. Hand me a radio.’ Dias’ expression hardened and Vash realised immediately he’d overplayed his hand.

‘I can’t let you do that sir,’ the Enforcer said coldly.

‘Really? On whose orders?’

‘The success of the mission takes priority,’ Dias said, ignoring the question. It didn’t matter - Vash already knew the answer. Could he just keep walking towards the coast? Could he use his gun to alert the revolutionaries if the Enforcers stopped him?

Then, without warning, the Enforcer nearest to them collapsed, a dotbow bolt protruding from his neck, and Vash’s immediate concerns evaporated. Before he had even registered what was happening, another Enforcer went down and the others dived for cover, Dias pulling Vash down with him.

The Enforcers returned fire in the direction of their unseen assailants and within seconds the entire jungle erupted with the staccato cacophony of gunfire and barked orders. Stray shots and fragments of shattered trunks thwacked into the undergrowth around Vash. At length he realised Dias was shouting something, barely discernible over the ringing in his ears, and fumbling a roll of bandages into his hands.

‘Put pressure on the wound!’ he yelled, pointing to a fallen Enforcer. ‘Stay there! Keep down!’

Vash did as instructed, doing his best to staunch the bleeding.  Even as he secured the bandages with shaking hands, he knew it was too late. The Enforcer gasped desperately at the air, choking, legs kicking, hands clutching at his own. He saw the life ebb from the man’s face, and after a long moment he fell still.

Vash fought down the rising nausea and scanned his surroundings. Dias had his back to him and was some way off, focussed on the assailants that had flanked them. This could be his only chance. Vash took a deep breath, then started running. Dias turned and shouted something, but within moments the Enforcer was once again pinned down and forced to take cover. Vash heard Dias calling, but nobody emerged from the firefight to accost him.

A stray shot grazed Vash’s shoulder, sending him sprawling. He gasped at the pain but it seemed somehow irrelevant - he picked himself up and kept running, the treacherous ground-cover threatening to trip him again at every step. Up ahead, the hulking mass of the crawler was visible through the thinning jungle. Then Vash was out in the open under the steel-grey sky, gulping at the clear, salty air. He reached inside his coat and drew the handgun, removing the magazine and discarding both with a careless throw. The muffled gunfire was growing more sporadic, petering out. If Vash was wrong, he might have just jeopardised the tenuous balance he'd spent the last century trying to maintain.

Sentries from the crawler were already waiting for him, anxiously scanning the jungle at his back. A couple came running towards him, guns drawn.

'Stay where you are! Hands on your head!' one shouted, in heavily accented Americano. He started as he drew close enough to recognise Vash’s face.

He did as instructed, grimacing as he raised his left arm and felt the pain in his shoulder anew, now that the adrenaline rush had subsided.

'I need to talk to your leader.’

If they heard they seemed to pay him no heed. The rebels searched him then, silently, they walked him at gunpoint to the cliff edge where a makeshift crane awaited and lowered him down.

Not far from the foot of the cliff a crowd had gathered. They seemed focussed on a man with a shock of dark hair, a shotgun holstered on his left hip, but as Vash descended one by one their heads turned to him. When they saw who he was, one yelled in shock. The others simply gaped.

For all Vash knew they'd lynch him the moment he touched the ground. Yet as the platform settled on the shingle a sense of unreal calm washed over him and the rushing in his ears subsided. There was none of the doubt or uncertainty he’d felt on the flight over. He stepped off the platform and walked slowly towards them.

'I surrender,' he said.

He kept walking towards the one that had held the mob’s focus until moments ago, assuming he must be the leader. The man, dark-skinned, dark-haired and garbed in a uniform and bandolier, had that look about him. The rebels parted around Vash, letting him pass.

'My my, Vash, the emperor of the world,' mused the revolutionary with a twinkle in his eye. He exchanged a brief, amused look with the woman stood behind him. 'If I'd known we were going to have such esteemed company I might have smartened myself up a bit. But it's been a busy day. I’m sure you know how it is.' There wasn't even a hint of malice in his voice.

'You can put your hands down now, friend. We can get that fixed up for you too,' the man continued, nodding at his shoulder. Vash looked down. Blood had seeped through the thin fabric of his overcoat, which now glistened darkly.

‘You’re in charge here?’ Vash asked.

'Where are my manners? We know your name, you should know ours. I'm Christo,' he smiled, then indicated the woman. 'This is Aurelie, my second in command, I guess, but I prefer to think of it as more of a collaborative effort.' Aurelie stepped forwards.

‘What’s he doing here?’ The challenge came from a tall, wiry man near the front of the crowd. His hands were bound behind his back and two other revolutionaries flanked him.

‘Quiet,’ snapped Aurelie, her voice cold. ‘Get him out of here.’

‘We’ll talk later Jan, okay?’ said Christo, adopting a more conciliatory tone. ‘The same goes for the rest of you.’

‘But he’s -’ someone in the crowd started.

‘I know who he is,’ Christo laughed. ‘Consider this; who could claim a greater reason to hate the Dyn than a man turned against his own species, forced to serve as a human face for our callous overlords? Vash is no collaborator. He’s here because he shares in our dream.’ He raised his shotgun theatrically to sporadic applause. Christo’s control over the crowd was admirable; something Vash could only aspire to.

‘Now come, we still have work to do. Back to your posts,’ the rebel leader said, in a voice that didn’t offer any alternative. Reluctantly, the revolutionaries dispersed. Some exchanged baffled glances, but none looked back.

‘I was beginning to think you weren't coming,' Aurelie said, turning back to Vash. Her cold expression seemed to flicker, then she smiled warmly. A wave of vindication surged through him.

‘You really did summon me here,’ he said.

‘Yes, we really did,’ Christo said. He held out a hand and Vash found himself shaking it. The rebel leader had a vice-like grip.

‘You couldn’t have picked a less ambiguous sign?’ Vash actually found himself laughing.

‘You’re not the easiest person to make covert contact with,’ said Aurelie ruefully. ‘It was as clear as we could risk. We need your help.’

‘But why risk it at all; what do you need me for?’

‘Tell me Vash, what does dragon’s teeth mean to you?’ asked Christo.

‘Is this a test; I assumed you knew?’

‘Tell us - for Christo’s edification,’ Aurelie said with a shrug. Christo regarded him with rapt focus.

‘Well there’s the ancient myth. It’s a metaphor, you see. A kind of hidden message that became a symbol for a dangerous technology. You don’t have a word for it anymore, language has changed so much. In English, we called it a warseed.’

‘Warseed? Aurelie’s told me so little,’ interrupted Christo, betraying a childlike fascination. Vash searched for the words that would explain, to a world that had long forgotten the context.

‘Before the Dynic invasion, machines were advanced enough to self-replicate, to create copies of themselves out of nothing but the materials that existed in the environment. Neummanetics, like the printers that Arco distributes, but fully general.’ Christo signalled that he followed.

‘General replicators could create any machine, given the right materials and sufficient time. Pump enough energy into them, give them a way to dissipate the waste heat and they could replicate faster than you’d believe was possible. Imagine something that bears the same relation to our own cell’s division as steel does to flesh and bone.’

Christo nodded, while Aurelie remained expressionless. Vash wondered how much of this she knew already.

‘The world was peaceful, but simultaneously weapons were powerful beyond imagination. At the time, they thought the greater risk was to keep huge stockpiles of legacy weapons sitting around, so actual war machines were increasingly replaced by stockpiles of warseeds. The world retained the capacity to fight, but at one further remove from actual use. It brought lasting peace.’

‘And yet still the Dyn invaded,’ said Christo, a trace of bitterness creeping into his voice.

‘All factions in-system followed the same logic, so it was assumed that any potential invasion would have to cross interstellar space, giving them years of warning. The possibility that an enemy fleet might just appear in Earth orbit, using means we don’t understand even after the fact, seemed so absurdly remote that it didn’t even merit consideration. The appearance of the Other Moon and the Dyn fleet was a black swan; an unknown unknown. Conventional forces were quickly overwhelmed by brute force and within minutes Earth was held hostage.’

‘You say they,’ Christo interjected, taking a step back from Vash. ‘But you’re speaking from memory, aren’t you?’

Vash nodded sadly; there was no point withholding that fact.

‘Things unravelled so fast that they… that we didn’t have a chance to respond in real time. But what I don’t understand,’ said Vash turning back to Aurelie, ‘is exactly how this is relevant. Do you have a warseed in that sub?’

‘Better than that,’ Christo grinned.

‘The Utilitaria had a contingency plan,’ said Aurelie. ‘And now that you’re here, the final piece is in place.’

Dias found the kid not far from where the other rebels had abandoned him, pulling himself forward. His legs trailed uselessly behind, shattered from where a frag had caught him.

‘Is Vash working with you?’ Dias asked.

The kid ignored him and just kept putting one hand in front of the other with the single-minded determination of someone who recognised they were already doomed.

‘Hey kid, I asked you a question,’ said Dias. He rolled the kid over and pinned him down with one boot resting gently on his chest. The rebel looked back up at him, holding his gaze with bright, green eyes.

‘Finish it or lemme be on my way,’ the rebel managed through gritted teeth. ‘Either way I ain’t tellin’ you shit.’ He tried to spit, but the bloody spittle made it no further than his chin.

‘I’m not asking twice,’ Dias cautioned. Weak hands pushed ineffectually at his foot. After a while the rebel gave in, exhausted, his body going limp.

‘We’re gonna free you,’ the kid said, his voice barely more than a strained whisper now. ‘We’re gonna free you all.’

‘Maybe you will,’ Dias sighed. He drew his sidearm and leveled it at the point between the boy’s closed eyes. No sense in wasting good morphine; he only had minutes to live. Dias looked away and pulled the trigger.

Afterwards he called Corbin.

‘Vash has gone. He demanded to accompany us, then went off-mission. They knew we were here - a recon team ambushed us.’ There was no immediate reply. ‘Your orders?’ Dias asked.

‘Where is Vash now?’ came the response.

‘We’re not sure, we assume he’s with them. He left in the midst of the fighting.’

There was another extended pause; Dias thought he heard an exasperated sigh.

‘Wait for the reinforcements. Get Vash and the hostage back unharmed. Otherwise, proceed as planned.’

Chapter 14: Convergence

'Over on the mountain, thunder magic spoke

'Let the people know my wisdom, fill the land with smoke'

Better run through the jungle

Better run through the jungle

Better run through the jungle

Whoa, don’t look back to see'

Creedence Clearwater Revival

Tuva and another grabbed Jan roughly and led him away from where Christo and Aurelie stood, deep in conversation with the enemy.

He glanced back, anger growing as Christo threw back his head and laughed, placing an affirming hand on Vash’s shoulder. It seemed as though something in the world had broken; this strange, gaunt dictator had wandered out of screens and posters and into real life. And just like that, they were all supposed to believe he was an ally.

‘Today’s your lucky day, huh?’ Tuva sneered as she followed his gaze.

Jan hardly heard her. Christo had announced to them all that Vash had always hated the Dyn. But what did that matter, if his actions didn’t match his words? He was a collaborator and his hands were steeped in blood regardless of what feelings he might secretly harbour. Jan knew all too well what his involvement meant; whether it succeeded or failed, the revolution wouldn’t wipe away Arco. Work with collaborators and what did you become? Wastelanders knew this - they had seen it happen before. Half the self-styled rebels out there fought using Arco’s armaments. Christo was even more naive than Jan had feared if he didn’t suspect Vash’s motives.

As for Aurelie; she was no longer the enigma she had been. She wanted him dead; she was a threat.

Jan noticed a sudden shift in Christo; the man’s easy stance grew rigid. The change rippled outwards from him across the revolutionaries gathered on the beach, as everyone fell still. One by one they turned again to watch the cliff edge and Jan instinctively followed, his captors momentarily distracted. At last he heard it, barely audible above the rain and surf but growing in intensity, getting closer. The sound of gunfire and the drone of rotor blades. The column of soldiers, pursuing them so patiently ever since their flight from Conurbation Fifteen, had arrived.

Without warning the autocannons mounted on the crawler let rip, thudding out shells that arced away from the shore. The shots seemed to tear the revolutionaries from their collective trance, and as if on cue the beach exploded with frenetic activity.

‘- everyone into position,’ came Christo’s voice from the radio on Tuva’s belt. ‘Have the mortars fire over the cliff - spotters on the crawler can direct fire. Otherwise dig in. We only need to buy time.’

‘Tuva, I need a weapon,’ Jan called as she turned to leave him.

‘What, so you can turn it on us again? Piss off,’ she spat. ‘You stay away from our fight, and if Arco’s having a really good day they might just take you alive.’

‘Without one I’m just dead weight. I’ve got as much reason to make sure the bathyscaphe leaves as anyone,’ he pleaded.

‘You’ve got to be joking. You think Christo still wants you on the sub?’ Tuva laughed incredulously. ‘He trusted you, but he’s no fool. He won’t make that mistake twice.’

‘You think Vash deserves a place?’

‘What, because he’s a collaborator? If he is then what does that make you? You were conspiring with one of them, remember? At least he can claim to have been doing it for our good. What’s your excuse?’

‘Tuva, she’s still alive,’ he said, grabbing her shoulder as she turned to leave again. She spun round, elbowing him hard in the stomach. Jan doubled over, gasping for breath. He collapsed onto the wet shingle with his hands still bound tightly together and rolled over, trying to force himself to a sitting position.

‘Touch me again and you won’t live to regret it,’ Tuva hissed, eyes flaring with anger. ‘Stay out the way. Or better yet, go lie on one of the barricades. At least then you’d be good for something.’ She stalked off in the direction of the trenches, directing the revolutionaries to mounted weapons and cover.

Jan cast his eyes around, momentarily at a loss as to what to do. The bathyscaphe, now slung beneath a massive float, had been mounted between the twin hulls of a crude catamaran which lay at anchor just offshore. Waves were already swirling beneath its bulbous hull, yet even now Pao and the other technicians clambered over it, running last-minute checks as the tide rose and the enemy closed in around them.

His only hope of seeing his daughter again was to somehow get the Dyn onto the catamaran, then aboard the sub. But how? Even with his hands bound, Jan could stand and manage a run, but what would be the point? Tuva or Aurelie would gun him down before he ever made it to the sea, let alone the bathyscaphe.

The revolutionaries were dug in, seeking what little shelter the shallow trenches and makeshift barricades afforded. The clouds seemed to descend on them, as if even the sky was hoping to block their escape. He heard a faint rumble, which dopplered as it grew louder.

Flares erupted from the crawler atop the cliff, brilliant against the clouds, and a missile shrieked through the blinding haze, narrowly missing its mark. One of the helicopters followed; flying low, gatling cannons burring as it strafed the beach, the noise almost unbearably loud. He cowered where he lay and struggled desperately to free himself. The helicopter shot out over the sea and banked around. Still unable to loosen the cords around his hands, Jan boosted himself to a standing position. As the noise of the rotors began to louden again he half sprinted, half stumbled towards the circle of vehicles that marked the location of the Dyn prisoner, his bound hands throwing off his balance, finally reaching a supply truck and sliding past its bulk. Another strafing run sounded behind him.

The Dyn lay in that sheltered place, still immobilised. It fixed one of those soulless eyes on Jan as he came into view, only speaking as he drew close.

‘Still alive. You are resourceful, that is good.’

‘Not for much longer, not if I don’t get off this beach. Arco’s here to rescue you.’

‘I hear. But I don’t want their rescue - nothing has changed. Take me with you and I will ensure you see your daughter unharmed.’ Jan winced, but he didn’t press the alien further. They still had a deal.

‘I’m not much good to you at the moment,’ he said, showing the Dyn his hands, still trussed behind his back.

‘That is no problem. How do you think I was able to get to the photograph?’

The Dyn shifted, straining against the restraints that pinned it down. Jan took a precautionary step back, gaping as it contorted its right forelimb in a way that would have implied broken bones, had it been a terrestrial animal. It was sickening to watch, despite the Dyn’s alien physiology. The long blade-like claws that adorned each forelimb retracted and with a final twist the Dyn slipped free of the rope that had bound it.

‘You could have escaped whenever you wanted.’

‘Yet I didn’t,’ came the Dyn’s response. The stutter of gunfire was growing louder beyond the ring of vehicles.

Jan approached the Dyn warily and turned his back so that it could cut him loose. He did his best not to cringe away as its cold skin brushed against his, but the anticipated death blow never came. His hands were freed and the Dyn withdrew.

‘We need to wait for a distraction before we can make for the sub,’ said Jan, rubbing his wrists where the rope had chafed. ‘Arco will be forced to push down onto the beach if they’re hoping to free you - that will be our best chance. Until then, lie low.’ He fumbled with the knots that still bound the Dyn’s other limbs.

He heard the crump of explosions as the mortar teams fired a volley at assailants still unseen. It just lay there, unresponsive.

‘Do you understand?’ he pressed.

‘I understand.’

‘Good. Time to make myself useful,’ said Jan, glancing around furtively. He ducked away from the shelter of the vehicles and backed out into the open, making for the nearest trench.

The first helicopter flew back out over the beach, exchanging fire with the crawler, heavy calibre machine guns raking over the armoured top decks. The crawler’s autocannons found their mark, lines of tracer converging on the helicopter, sending it spinning out of the sky. The rotor blades shredded apart as they hit the waves, sending debris and spray flying. As Jan closed to within meters of the trench, a pair of missiles streaked out of nowhere, arrowing into the side of the crawler. He felt the concussion in his chest.

The first missile detonated ineffectively against the crawler’s armoured flank. The second made it through. It must have ignited something within, as a brilliant flash gored the massive vehicle open, throwing up a great pillar of smoke and sending scraps of debris raining down on the beach. Jan saw a few surviving revolutionaries dashing clear, abseiling down the cliff in disarray. With the crawler gone it wouldn’t be long before Arco had secured the clifftop, enabling them to lay down suppressing fire.

Jan made it to one of the trenches just moments before the first shots thwacked into the barricades. He dived to the ground beside a revolutionary. The fighter, head mostly covered by a metal shell-helmet, didn’t even turn to look at the new arrival, preoccupied by enemies on the cliff above.

‘I don’t have a weapon!’ Jan shouted, his voice drowned out as another barrage of mortar shells struck the clifftop. The suppressing fire abated.

‘Out the way!’ The fighter motioned impatiently for Jan to move, and crouching low he returned fire, taking advantage of the brief lull. Spent rounds clinked off the shingle.

He’d done his frantic best to plan ahead, but already the available ways out seemed to be vanishing. If he could get hold of a gun, then he had a better chance of making it to the bathyscaphe. If he could rendezvous with the Dyn then maybe he could get it aboard and escape… But who was he kidding? Christo was right. They were all out of plan. He couldn’t pretend this was anything more than improvising.

The revolutionary next to Jan slumped forwards, his helmet holed by a high calibre round, his rifle slipping from his grasp. Jan dived for the man’s weapon and hefted it, settling the stock against his shoulder.

A dark shape roared overhead, close enough that Jan could feel the downdraft, twin blades fanning the smoke away. The helicopter discharged another volley of micro-missiles on the line of trenches, and the world whited out as explosions engulfed heavy weapons, support vehicles and revolutionaries alike. Jan ducked down again, getting as low as he could and only daring to raise his head when the gunship had passed.

Armour clad Enforcers leapt from the helicopter as it descended to hover barely fifty metres from where the Dyn lay, still concealed, and they fanned out amid the smoke and debris, taking advantage of the chaos to push on the trenches.

As the helicopter attempted to lift away it was caught in the glare of Christo’s strange gun, the metal glowing with heat where that pale beam of light caught it. The fuel on board went up and the aircraft spiralled out of control, belching flame. Christo was running towards the Arco troopers, seemingly heedless of the danger, already turning the gun on the advancing figures. A number of Enforcers, caught out of cover, collapsed in flames as Christo’s beam weapon played across their useless armour, and the revolutionaries rallied around him. Their triumph was short-lived, as more reinforcements arrived.

Jan turned his weapon towards the advancing squad. The recoil sent his shots wide, the noise deafening. Another revolutionary was knocked down beside Jan, a burst of gunfire from a squad of Enforcers zipping very close to his shoulder. Another squad rushed towards Jan and the surviving revolutionaries.

Jan levelled his rifle at another Enforcer, braced for the recoil this time, and fired again until the rifle clicked; no more ammo. The remaining Enforcers reached their position, one of them drawing a bayonet knife. Jan swung the butt of the rifle wildly at the soldier’s arm.

The stock of the rifle smashed the knife out of the enemy’s hands and another jab at the his face sent him sprawling to the ground. Jan grabbed a fallen gun, swinging it around as he fired. The stubby carbine coughed and fired a nanowire flechette that tore the enemy’s chest armour apart.

He never even saw who threw the grenade. A moving shape caught his eye, and before his mind had processed the thought he was backpedalling frantically. Then the blast came.

As his vision cleared and the ringing in his ears died away Jan patted himself down, frantically checking for shrapnel wounds; he seemed to be okay. Then he caught sight of a body lying nearby, its face obscured by an unruly tangle of black hair. His heart dropped.

Jan rushed over to where Christo lay, momentarily oblivious to the precariousness of his position and dragged him back into cover, fearing the worst. The man was still alive, but only just; his pulse was weak and his breathing ragged. A brutal gash marred his torso, cutting from diaphragm to navel. Jan tore his top into strips and did his best to bind the wound.

Jan glanced from the catamaran, still floating on the sea behind, to Christo and back, torn by indecision. Of the Dyn there was no trace, it’s hiding place was already overrun. He just had to hope it had somehow escaped. If he didn’t move soon the Enforcers would be upon him and he would never see Eva again regardless of what had happened to the alien. But Christo was hurt, and he couldn’t bring himself to leave him there to die.

‘We need help!’ he called over the din of battle. ‘Christo’s injured!’ His own voice sounded distant and wrong. A couple of fighters ran past, but they either didn’t hear him or didn’t care.

‘Someone, help me!’ Jan called again, his voice hoarse.

Another figure clambered over the barricade, rifle slung over one shoulder; Tuva. She snarled when she saw him and for a moment he thought she would shoot him, but then she noticed Christo and rushed to kneel by his side. She cursed under her breath.

‘We’re going to get you out of here, Christo,’ she promised, barely bothering to conceal her distress. ‘You’re not going to be a martyr today. How bad is it?’ she asked, turning to Jan.

Jan’s expression must have said all that needed saying.

‘Help me get him up,’ she snapped. ‘We’re leaving. Might not be how he pictured it, but right now I don’t give a crap.’

Together they lifted him, one under each arm, and struggled down to the surf as quickly as they could manage. Christo’s beret and bandolier, the affectations of a revolutionary, lay discarded behind them.

Caught between the withering hail of fire from the clifftop and the soldiers pressing from the flank, the resolve of the remaining fighters collapsed. They fled in disarray, in the only direction they could. Breaking cover, many never even made it to the sea before they were gunned down. Jan’s only hope of making it off the beach himself lay in being one target amongst many.

Jan and Tuva waded into the surf, Christo a dead weight between them, his head lolling and his feet dragging through the water. Tuva muttered assurances to Christo all the while, as much to convince herself, Jan suspected, as to console the comatose revolutionary. He glanced over his shoulder; the Arco troops had stopped advancing, firing in short bursts at the fleeing mob plunging into the sea.

He ignored the bodies floating face down in the water that rose around him and the bullets whizzing past, keeping his eyes fixed determinedly ahead, on Aurelie and the bathyscaphe.

‘Jan?’

He was so focussed on keeping his head above the waves, on getting to the bathyscaphe, that he didn’t even notice the sudden absence at first, a silence more deafening than the battle that had preceded it.

‘Jan!’ hissed Tuva, more urgently this time.

The shooting had ceased, as abruptly as it had begun.

‘Look - Arco are pulling back…’ He turned to look back at the beach and even as she spoke the words his blood ran cold at the realisation. ‘The Dyn - they’re going to bomb us.’

They didn’t hesitate, swimming for the catamaran as hard as they could, thrashing at the water, dragging Christo along with them. Jan drew on every last reserve of strength he had left. His vision clouded, but he forced himself to keep struggling against the waves.

He pictured the sky above the clouds alive with alien stars, visible even in full daylight. An entire constellation, radiating malevolent intent, manoeuvring into position overhead. They had minutes at best to get as far away from here as possible.

The other survivors had also realised what was happening. Fortunately they had a head start on most of those fleeing, but, not burdened by Christo, the others were catching up.

The lonely bark of a warning shot sounded from the catamaran, bleak and hopeless. The revolutionaries were desperate and in no mood to listen - what difference would it make to heed that warning if it only meant death moments later at the hands of those above? More shots rang out in quick succession and Jan saw a man fall from the deck into the waters and the gathering crowd below, to shouts of outrage and desperation. Aurelie and a pair of guards held the line for now, but for how much longer? Soon they would be overwhelmed by sheer weight of numbers.

‘Get back!’ Aurelie shouted, her face betraying dismay when she saw Jan and Tuva amid the crowd.

‘We have Christo - he’s injured!’ Tuva called as they swam closer. That drew their attention. ‘There’s medical supplies on the sub. He needs help urgently!’

‘There’s no room - Christo wouldn’t want to jeopardise the mission…’ Aurelie trailed off as she saw the injured revolutionary, the expression on her face pained. The mob around them erupted anew with accusations, threats and pleas.

‘Christo built this revolution!’ challenged one voice. ‘He should get his chance.’

‘Just let him on long enough to see to his wounds. Please, I can help him,’ implored another.

‘We stick to the plan,’ Aurelie said firmly. She’d lowered the gun.

‘What plan? You said you weren’t leaving us to die!’ You could scarcely see her wince.

‘Where’s the Arco traitor - is he already onboard?’

‘Coward! You only want to escape yourself!’

‘Get back!’ Aurelie shouted again as another man attempted to climb up the hull. One of the guards kicked at his hands, forcing him to let go. Pao whispered in her ear, the words inaudible over the mob, but Jan knew what had been said. They were ready to leave. Despair flooded through him.

Suddenly something fast and serpentine rushed past his leg. Without warning the Dyn exploded from the water, clambering up the hull and using it’s tails to swing itself onto the deck in a single fluid motion. It scythed Pao and Aurelie’s legs out from underneath them with another whiplash flick of those tails then turned on the nearest guard. He fired on the alien but his sidearm didn’t even slow it down. The Dyn slit his throat with a swipe of a vicious blade-like claw.

‘Help me get Christo on board,’ said Jan, climbing up after the Dyn. Tuva didn’t respond.

Jan looked down to see Tuva as paralysed with shock as everyone else was, the survivors suddenly momentarily unsure whether they really wanted to be up there on the catamaran afterall.

‘Come on, now’s our only chance,’ he urged, dropping a rope. Blank faced, Tuva did as he suggested, looping the rope under Christo’s arms then pulling herself up after him.

The final guard had put the bulk of the bathyscaphe’s float between him and the Dyn, and opened fire on it with an assault rifle, driving it into cover. Behind it Aurelie scrambled for her own weapon, but she was too late. The Dyn plunged from the deck, only to reemerge behind the second guard and in an instant it had him hostage, a claw at his neck.

Aurelie barely hesitated, but it was enough. The Dyn flung the man’s body at her as she opened fire, diving for the hatch. It pulled itself inside, disappearing into the depths of the sub. She rounded on Jan, face livid, pulling him towards the hatch as the other revolutionaries came to their senses.

‘We have to get the Dyn off the sub,’ she hissed.

‘There’s no time. Do you want to start a fight with that thing inside?’ he asked.

Aurelie’s expression was thunderous, but she didn’t stop Jan as he pushed past her and Pao, helping Tuva manhandle Christo’s inert form through the hatch and down into the bathyscaphe.

'Are you sure we can't take anymore?' he asked her, although if Jan was honest with himself he already knew her answer.

'We can't take everyone! There's not enough room!' Aurelie shouted over the rising uproar.

Pao struggled inside, as the first boarders began sprinting for the hatch. Jan and Aurelie followed Pao, swinging the hatch closed just seconds before the press of bodies hit them. He caught a glimpse of frantic scrabbling hands, of faces contorted in desperation, faces he recognised, pleading with him, wondering why they had been left behind to die. Then the heavy door was shut and their pleas silenced. Even their fists beating against the thick metal sounded distant.

Jan slid down the ladder, dropping into the capsule. There really wasn’t enough room; they were a seat short, even if you ignored the Dyn, which would have been some feat considering the bulk of its coiled form. It lay in a corner, motionless and unresponsive, as though none of the events of the past hour had ever happened.

Vash had folded himself, spider-like, into one of the seats furthest from the entrance and closest to the Dyn, seemingly entirely unperturbed by it's presence. Tuva had already strapped Christo into one of the seats opposite and was doing what she could to see to his wounds, before she in turn would have to strap herself in. Christo was drifting in and out of consciousness, glancing around the cramped capsule, too disoriented to comprehend where he was or who he was with.

Pao busied himself with the controls as Jan staggered to his feet, still trying to take in his baffling surroundings. Through the small porthole in the wall, Jan thought he could make out a faint brightening through the clouds, as if the sun had come out, only not so.

Aurelie lunged across the capsule, shoving past Jan and Pao, slamming down a red lever on the console. She braced herself against a bulkhead as the solid fuel motors activated in rapid succession, sending the catamaran skimming away from the shore and throwing those that still clung to the hull into the sea. Jan was blasted into a wall, concussed by the sudden shock of the launch. Through the porthole, the sky brightened further.

As he faded in and out of consciousness, Jan thought it fortunate that they had decided to rig the controls for the catamaran through the bathyscaphe for their just-in-time escape. Then as he remembered those poor, desperate souls abandoned to their fate, he wondered darkly whether that too had been intentional; if Aurelie had designed the escape system with this very eventuality in mind. There was no celebration of their survival. It just didn’t seem right.

‘We made it,’ Christo managed, his voice barely above a whisper, as he reached over to clasp Aurelie’s hand in his. Jan saw her anguished smile as she squeezed his hand back. As he lapsed back into oblivion Jan reflected on the small mercy that at least Christo had not had to see his dream so sullied by its confrontation with base reality.

The Dyn projectiles flared brightly as they sliced through the mesosphere, the intense heat of re-entry ablating their outer surfaces. They were little more than metal needles with steering vanes and just enough intelligence to recognise the landmark they were aimed at – a shallow bay littered with corpses and broken machinery.

As each one rushed downwards at eight kilometres per second, punching contrails of plasma through the clouds, they paid no heed to the strange, ungainly vehicle skimming away from their target across the ocean. The catamaran had barely travelled more than a kilometre when the projectiles struck.They impacted in a perfectly choreographed sequence, some at the cliffs and others at specific points along the beach. The explosions merged into a single pulse of heat and light, blasting out a plume of vapour that formed the beginnings of a mushroom cloud. Of revolutionary and soldier alike, there was no trace.

The blast front arrived only a few seconds after the solid fuel motors cut out and Aurelie released the clamps that had held the bathyscaphe in place. The catamaran was shredded and light shone through the water above the bathyscaphe, boiling it to steam, the shockwave violent enough to render the occupants unconscious. The hull rang like a gong and equipment clattered out of racks to smother the survivors, but somehow the bathyscaphe held together and continued to sink beneath the ocean surface, turning end-over-end like a bloated corpse.

End of Part I

Interlude: The World Aflame

Something was terribly wrong. There was no continuity, no sense of awakening or coming to awareness. One moment, Vash was gently drifting off to sleep in the station’s rejuvenation clinic, the next he was awake in a dimly lit and deserted room. He felt a sense of absence too wide and deep to explain, a gap where expanded senses and mentalities should have been. There was nothing around Vash except what he could see, and there wasn’t much of that.

For some reason, the rejuve capsule’s door wouldn’t open. Vash pushed at it weakly with one hand, still garbed in a smock. The transparent plate slid aside slowly and silently. With a supreme effort of will Vash tried to reactivate his expanded mentality, focussing his thoughts down to a fine point, but there was nothing to activate. His personal connection to the Utilitaria had failed like a circuit breaking. The world had lost its guardrails.

Vash dropped down on one knee and stood up, blinking hard. At least the rejuvenation itself was complete – it seemed to have scoured away all of his inserts, along with the broken collagen and aged cells. There was a basic corridor curving up ahead and all the structures were black or grey, so he was probably still on the station. Interface spots were dead or depleted and the room was otherwise empty. He wondered where all the others had gone.

A light above Vash’s head flickered and faded. That one detail, more than the rest, sent a jolt of ice running through his spine – he hadn’t seen such a thing for more than a century. In the world he’d grown into, machinery always worked with unobtrusive perfection. He realized on some level what must have happened; the Utilitaria were absent from the local environment. In Vash’s considerable experience, such a sudden interruption this deep into the heavily scrutinized zones around Earth was without precedent. It was more than unsettling.

Vash started to run; he had the body of a twenty-year-old now, but his muscles were atrophied and physical discomfort was not something he was used to. The floor shuddered. An attack, or a meteoroid collision? Paranoid fantasies of nanobe swarms or massive solar flares swam through his mind.

‘Who’s attacking us? How long until help arrives?’ he demanded. If all else failed the Utilitaria could answer queries directly. The sense of rising panic grew when there was no answer from the ether around him; he squashed it down. Vash hadn’t faced real death in centuries, but he did remember the time before the Utilitaria.

The station shuddered again. He heard the thud of something falling out of a locker but didn’t risk turning. The impulses flaring into his head were telling him not to turn back. There was something outside his understanding going on.

There was a violent shove perpendicular to what he thought of as 'down'. He staggered as the acceleration built.

Vash heard a quiet sob as he descended the fireman’s pole that led to the ‘escape pod’ bay. Even he was shaken, his hands slipping as he descended into the dimly lit bay and fell to the floor, where four others were waiting.

He recognised them all; friends who’d synchronised their clinic visits with his, as was the custom. Calder was something big in the local demarchy; his silvered skin would usually reflect whatever local identity traits he was cultivating, but it was dulled now, as though he were an android. Eoin was the oldest aside from Vash, dressed in a skinsuit, a grim expression on his face. Elvie was a massmind - two clone bodies that shared a single personality, linked by a high capacity datalink. Both her forms were weeping, shocked at the sudden loss of the Utilitaria. She was only as old as she looked - an artificial thirty, thin and neotinic.

‘Thank eternity you made it,’ Eoin said from inside the helmet, lifting Vash to his feet. ‘They brought you up intact as quickly as possible. You look awful,’ he said.

‘I feel like I’ve been microwaved, but you don’t look much better,’ Vash replied, grinning weakly at his friend and groaning as cramps spread through his legs. ‘Do we know what’s going on?’

The lights flickered and both Elvies shuddered, as if suffering an onset of a seizure.

‘EMP, plus some other nasties. When we woke up everything was just… absent. Most inserts and implants gone, no entopics. Must be some kind of high-level viral attack,’ said Calder, by way of explanation; he was trying to control a shudder, the corners of his mouth twitching with anxiety.

‘They’ve been getting worse for the last hour. She’s not taking it well -’ He pointed to the sobbing forms of Elvie and the fibre-optic cable that snaked between her two skulls. ‘She’s switched to a hardwired cable.’

‘Did they tell you this was the end of the world? That’s what they said to me. Doesn’t seem so melodramatic now,’ Eoin said, already walking toward the capsule. The gravity was dropping and changing direction - someone was despinning the station.

‘Where did it come from?’ said Calder. ‘That’s what I don’t understand. First thing I heard was when the capsule ejected me, next thing I knew the Utilitaria was chattering like crazy, telling me there’s some kind of coordinated attack. That it was going to disappear and never return, that we were on our own.’

‘We’ve got to leave,’ said Eoin, taking charge. ‘The Utilitaria were quite clear about that before… before they dropped out. Did they tell you it was forever as well?’

Vash moved to help the nearest Elvie up. She was as light as a child, body filled with augmentations, all of which were failing. Her cold, grey limbs twitched spasmodically, like a spider in its death throes. The EMP blasts or viral strikes from whatever mysterious danger was out there were affecting her badly, but together with Calder they hauled her forms into the escape pod.

‘How do we work this thing?’ Eoin asked, once they were inside and it became clear there was no automatic launch sequence. The pod had been fabricated in a hurry and was still warm - a reflective hyperdiamond cylinder lined with a few transparencies around the top surface. Vash spotted an antique console – actual switches and throttles - and pushed himself forward, searching around the labelled buttons as he forced himself to concentrate. Calder and Eoin looked on as Vash pressed a big green switch in the centre. A moment later they all felt more than a standard Earth gravity shove them clear of the station; a brief chemical burn.

Vash lost his grip on the console and bumped into the wall beside Eoin, rebounding as the thrust abated into freefall. Flares of light filtered through the transparency, resolving into jagged shapes. The view refused to clear, as if Vash’s mind was trying to reject the reality around it. Then, he heard Elvie scream briefly and understood that he wasn’t hallucinating.

The station they’d all travelled to followed a mid-altitude orbit over the Earth’s equator, in a dense band of orbital structures. Now it looked like so much silvery confetti, the habitats shredding apart in a cascade of collisions. Vash felt the fury it propagated even through vacuum. Brilliant white threads inscribed the space above and below them, pushing forward huge spiny machines. They were spacecraft, and they weren’t any type he recognised.

Vash sensed movement in his peripheral vision and turned sharply, his head swimming. Eoin moved to face him but the other two just stared out of the front window, transfixed by the horror of it all. Something slammed into the station, ripping through the rotating wheel. Another vessel swept below them like a marine predator, orbiting lower and faster. Projectiles spewed from it as it passed, seemingly oblivious to their presence. The slugs traced oddly slow-moving curves as they slashed into debris, cascading secondary explosions.

‘Those are some slow-moving bullets. Might even be ordinary gunfire, not mass-driven,’ said Eoin, and Vash nodded emptily, his mind knocking about randomly inside his skull. ‘I remember from old newsfeeds, and I mean really old. That technology is very primitive. Who are they? Why are they doing this?'

‘Can’t be all that primitive,’ Calder interjected. His voice was dead, yet still controlled. ‘They killed the Utilitaria so totally that we don’t even seem to be fighting back. I can’t even imagine how advanced a technology that implies.’

‘They’re inhuman,’ sniffed Elvie, speaking up for the first time, both bodies chorusing together. ‘Not even those Union fanatics would dare do this. No-one would, not ever.’

A horrible suspicion was growing inside Vash, fantasies of rogue superintelligence, the return of the Utilitaria’s defeated competitors. He wondered why he felt so focussed, like this wasn’t really happening to him. Maybe someone had hacked his expanded mentality, projecting fantasy-memories into it? No; this was real. Yet there was an element of calm and rationality to his thoughts; the fact remained that in the world of the Utilitaria, human beings were not so easily broken. Vash turned in the freefall and saw one of the Elvies was curled up, while the other talked in a dead voice, her childlike face empty.

‘Have you looked down yet?’

They all looked. The Earth was aflame, bright clusters of meteors flaring as they touched atmosphere, splashes of blinding radiance imprinted on the surface as they struck. They were passing over Asia and could see the entire Indian subcontinent, a band of fire imprinted across its northern latitudes.

‘Some of the world's largest cities are… were down there,’ said Calder in a broken voice. ‘We have to surrender. Whoever it is, wherever they are. We can’t fight this - we can’t afford the time it would take to win, even if we can win. For Eternity’s sake, there must be a hundred million people caught in that one inferno. Give them what they want.’

‘I expect we are surrendering, if there’s anyone out there still capable of doing that,’ said Vash.

‘They did say we were on our own,’ said Eoin. ‘If the Utilitaria are gone, does that mean all the virtuals are gone too? I couldn’t even put an order of mag estimate on how many deaths that implies.’

‘I just don’t understand any of it! Where did they come from?’ cried the sobbing Elvie. ‘How could anyone kill the Utilitaria that fast?’

‘Aliens,’ said Calder, his shaking hand sweeping to encompass a few of the black ships. ‘This is first contact. Don’t ask me how they got here. Maybe someone that far beyond the Utilitaria really can travel faster than light? Those warships used hyperdrives to jump right next to Earth, stabbing us right in our soft underbelly,’ he laughed weakly. ‘I have to say, we never saw that coming.’

‘No,’ sniffed the second Elvie. ‘That’s impossible. Has to be. FTL is time travel.’

‘Who’s we?’ said Vash. He turned away from the bruised Earth and glanced back at Calder.

‘The ExDef,’ Calder said. He raised his arm, palm flat, and a sigil flared briefly on the outstretched skin. It looked like a line drawing of a jagged tooth. ‘Existential Defence. That’s what we called ourselves; not much more than a few paranoid wargamers. Seems a bit silly now, but we did ask the Utilitaria if they had any plans in the event that hostile aliens came knocking.’

‘Oh, I bet you’re loving this,’ said Eoin. Calder didn’t look perturbed. He closed his palm and the sigil vanished. Vash turned back to the devastated Earth; a thin expanding ring of tsunami was just breaking across the Indonesian archipelago.

‘There were contingency plans for this outcome; a massed invasion,’ Calder said. ‘But the Utilitaria assumed if such a thing happened it would be an attack out of interstellar space, giving us months to prepare. We know there can’t be any large energy sources nearby or we would have seen them. Every hot body radiates energy.’

‘Bit late for Fermi arguments now,’ Eoin chimed in again. Calder glared back at him, as an impact flash from somewhere far below briefly illuminated their faces.

‘The only plausible motive to wage war on an interstellar scale is as part of an expansion to acquire resources, Neumman-style. But we could beat that. The plan was for our Neumanns in the asteroid belt and Kuiper to manufacture a defence fleet over a few weeks and counterattack. We’d have the home advantage, all the mass-energy of the solar system to prepare with and Dragons-teeth warseed templates to beat anything.’

‘Things never work out the way you expect,’ said Vash. He grimaced at the thought.

‘And instead, a fleet of eternity-forsaken alien spaceships just appears in low earth orbit and the Utilitaria are gone,’ Eoin replied bitterly. ‘Like a bloody Diabolus ex Machina. There won’t be any revenge fleet if there’s no warseeds, and there won’t be any warseeds if there’s no Utilitaria.’

‘We really ought to have seen them coming,’ Vash said; a part of him still wondering at their surreal calmness. ‘Remember Souvicou’s Starwhisp launch to Tau Ceti, or the expeditions to Sirius and Proxima? Those ships only massed a few hundred tonnes, and you could still spot their exhaust beams with the naked eye weeks after they left the solar system. A ten thousand tonne battleship - there’s no way you could hide it. You can’t sneak between the stars.’

‘That’s what we thought,’ said Calder. ‘Doesn’t seem to be true, does it?’

‘By the same token, we couldn’t hide any rearmament from them,’ Eoin said. Somewhere off in the middle distance, a pinprick flare briefly illuminated a dying habitat. ‘If we looked to be rearming or gathering our forces, they could just keep dropping rocks on the Earth, then flee the same way they arrived. You can’t hide weapons production on that scale.’

‘They really caught us out,’ Caulder said, face sunken. ‘This is checkmate in two moves. Doesn’t matter how many other pieces we have; they’re in all the wrong places.’

‘We are not in a game,’ Vash said, quietly.

He felt it was wrong on some deep level that they weren’t incapacitated by grief, even after witnessing the deaths of a hundred million fellow humans. The shock would reach all of them eventually, if they survived long enough.

None of them knew what to do next; right now, this empty orbital band seemed the safest place to stay. Vash tried the little capsule’s communications, but the combined EMP effects, along with the mysterious absence of Utilitaria, had silenced every spectrum.

Minutes ticked by as they all floated in silence. Vash wondered idly if any counterattack would come. It seemed unlikely, he reflected; the invaders had the Earth, still home to most of humanity, as a hostage.

The lifeboat crossed into Earth’s shadow a few minutes later and the survivors were greeted with another unwelcome surprise - out of direct sunlight, a dense constellation of new stars were visible. They shone in a bright band like a second milky way, roughly following the plane of Earth’s orbit, stretching back across the sky towards a blue glare point Vash didn’t recognise. Below, the Earth glowed a faint orange as firestorms raged.

‘Ships,’ Calder said dumbly. ‘Tens, maybe hundreds of thousands of them.’

‘Do you suppose this is it?’ Elvie said, voice cracking again. ‘The end of everything?’

Vash wanted to snap at her that he didn’t know; that nobody here knew what was going to happen next. That nothing made sense, that the world had broken and the laws of physics themselves bent to deliver an invading armada whose size was beyond estimation.

‘No,’ he said. ‘Even without the Utilitaria, this is a problem the world can solve. They’re terrorising us, not exterminating. We survived without them before, we can do it again. The rest of humanity can carry on without Earth, or the whole solar system.’

In the subsequent silent minutes, Vash fervently wished that he believed a single word of what he’d said. His attempts to operate the pod’s controls proved ineffective, and frequent sweeps up and down the radio bands revealed nothing but static. Around them, the bright pinpricks of kinetic or nuclear weapons cast fleeting shadows, the shimmer of spallation debris adding thousands of new stars. The cascade of collisions would render low Earth orbit lethal for decades to come.

Vash was facing the wrong way at the time the nuclear weapon exploded and that was the only thing that saved him. A flash of light filled his entire perception, consuming everything in heat.

He saw the others open their mouths for a moment, but there was no time for real emotion to register. The pressure hull burst with a sharp bang and then cracks were spreading and air and people were rushing out. Vash was spun, his grip on the handhold strained even as he felt the cold prickle of vacuum, throwing out a hand to one of the Elvies. Vision began to blur as Calder disappeared through the rent, screaming hoarsely as evaporating spittle puffed around his mouth. Vash halted his spin with an arm-twisting wrench, eyes spinning frantically. Eoin also had a handhold and stretched out to grab onto Elvie’s wrist, just above Vash’s outstretched hand. A moment later, her second body hurtled out of the hole and jerked both her and Eoin clear.

Vash’s strength was gone and he tasted blood in his mouth as the air pressure dropped to nothing. He kept his mouth open and let the air escape, remembering ancient vacuum exposure drills.

The hurricane of escaping air subsided and he let his white-knuckled grip relax. Something shrieked, and out of nowhere a thin plastic sheet materialised, cutting the pod in half, excluding the hole and forming an airtight seal; oxygen flooded back in but Vash had already passed out.

Vash woke with a start. He blinked away the tears and shuddered, feeling a deep tearing in his chest. Despite the pain, his lungs still inflated when he took a ragged breath. Calder and Eoin and Elvie, the closest of his friends had disappeared, gone in an eyeblink. He remembered the most potent things about them; Calder’s amusing politicking, Eoin’s gauche fascination with military history, Elvie’s ever-changing body modifications. Their deaths wouldn’t even be recorded, not today, maybe not ever. Who would remember the dead, if no-one was left alive?

Vash realised then that the screaming hadn’t stopped; he wasn’t the only one. Between crackles and hisses, a voice was emanating from the lifeboat’s short-wave radio.

‘There are no more machine minds. You will surrender unconditionally. The world is restrained.’ The message repeated a few times, then fell silent.

Vash could hardly bring himself to care what the voice was shouting about as the escape pod fell towards Earth. Deorbited by the impact or some suicidal machine instinct, he couldn’t tell.

He was entering the Earth’s atmosphere somewhere over the South Atlantic, and if re-entry didn’t get him then the bombardment the Earth was receiving certainly would. He wondered whether anyone else he knew, any of his friends, would survive today. Maybe this was the beginning of the end of the whole human race. Now, at last, he felt the darkness rise in him. This was the end of everything; if not for the world itself, then for the world as he’d known it. The world of the Utilitaria.

Vash clenched his teeth in frustration, needing and yet failing to find some outlet, some resolution. He felt overwhelmed by the sheer injustice of it all, of not knowing how or why any of this had happened, of being so impotent, of dying without ever seeing this to its conclusion. But screaming wouldn’t make any of it better, so he stayed silent and tried to brace himself against the capsule, deploying the acceleration couch and darkening the transparencies. He felt the lifeboat begin to rumble as it scraped the Earth’s mesosphere and looked out of the survival bubble at the hole made by the fragment of debris, now patched over by a black slick of extruded carbon. As the shaking began Vash started to wonder if he might survive after all.

Chapter 15: Succession

Corbin looked up from the reports and files that piled his desk and leant back in the chair, closing his eyes wearily. Simply getting on top of his duties as Director and then acting Ambassador had kept him preoccupied and too busy to question whatever it was that Vash was involved in. In a way, that had been a blessing. The events of the day before had shifted his priorities and mow the looming threat of Dynic retaliation hung over everything.

One monitor still displayed a five-second loop of grainy video; a beach alive with swarming figures, burning wreckage and, in the distance, that bizarre sea-skimming submarine. Then the view flared blinding white and the feed repeated. Corbin had heard the airblast himself; a faint rumble that arrived almost an hour after the event.

He checked his watch. Soon the driver would arrive and he’d have to leave.

Corbin stood and walked to where his Internal Security Enforcer dress uniform, a near-featureless dark red garb, was laid out on the bed. Only a few subtle markings betrayed the rank of its owner; Enforcement, especially Internal Security, aspired to be an egalitarian organisation.

He had briefly considered attending the meeting in his new capacity as Director before deciding against it. The role held great authority, but the Enforcers regarded the Directorate with disdain, whilst they'd respect one of their own. Corbin doubted they'd mind that he was no longer officially part of Enforcement and was simply broadcasting where his true loyalties lay. Besides, the paperwork for his shiny new role was yet to go through.

The phone rang before he could finish getting dressed.

'Sir, the Ambassador's chauffeur called to say that he's running five minutes late - there was apparently some confusion at a checkpoint,' his secretary hastened to explain.

'Don't worry about it.'

'The Director's residence has its own chauffeur, are you sure you don't want me to - '

'No, that won't be necessary.'

'Yes sir, I'll ring up when he gets here. Is there anything else I can do?'

'That's all, thanks.' Corbin hung up.

Corbin had a reason to insist on using the Ambassador's chauffeur - he needed leads, some hint about what Vash had known, but when it came to his former superior they were hard to come by. All he had to go on were some cryptic words regarding the rebel insignia and the vague suggestion that things had changed with the Dyn. He was working off of rumours, but the fact that Vash had hidden something from him was no longer cause for mere curiosity - it had become serious the instant he had abandoned Dias and the others at the coast. In doing so, Vash had jeopardised the operation they’d both painstakingly organised and he’d brought the threat of Dynic retaliation closer. Enforcers under Corbin’s command, men that he’d trusted, had lost their lives. And perhaps it had all been for nothing - perhaps Vash had been vapourised along with the hundreds of other victims of the Dyn bombardment.

Yet he did not feel betrayed; trust was an expendable resource like anything else and Corbin had no doubt that Vash had taken the best course of action, given whatever it was he knew. The man was smart and, more crucially, he wouldn't have weighed the lives of those soldiers lightly - clearly something important had changed.

And despite the evidence, he couldn't quite believe that Vash had died in the blast. He must have been on that submarine. Corbin told himself that it wasn’t just blind hope. The ex-Ambassador wouldn’t have abandoned Dias simply to go and get killed on that beach; Vash wouldn’t have let himself die while there was still so much work to be done. But why the subterfuge? Why not just tell him? Didn’t they both want the same thing?

Vash's parting words surfaced from his memory: ‘She seemed particularly afraid of universal morality; that by some objective measure an action could be deemed to be fundamentally moral, or immoral.’ The Dyn feared universal morality. Somehow, that seemed important - it must be the crucial hint. K’txl was afraid of what gave humans their humanity.

Corbin had no sentimental illusions that Vash owed him an explanation. But whilst most survived by keeping their heads down and doing as they were instructed, Corbin had thrived by looking ahead and keeping the initiative.

Corbin checked himself in the mirror as he finished fastening his uniform. The sharp, angular face of a state orphanage kid looked back at him. He straightened the tunic and smiled briefly at the man in the mirror. Vash was playing his role in the great drama, and now it was Corbin’s turn to step to the forefront.

There had always been two imperatives in his life: the first was to make sure he was informed. The second was to ensure that he had as few constraints on acting on that information as possible; in other words, to transform himself into a machine for turning knowledge into action. In Internal Security, knowledge and power had been mutually reinforcing. He didn't see why the Directorate should be any different.

The phone rang again. Corbin gathered the papers from his desk, taking two files with him and locking the rest away in a drawer before leaving his private quarters. A bodyguard and an aide waited patiently in the corridor outside, both of them recently hired replacements for Meyer's staff. The bodyguard, Joao, would accompany him. The guy was uncomplicated, with a clean track record in the military police until an incident involving excessive use of force had ended that particular career, but Corbin believed in second chances. The aide, whose name he hadn't yet bothered to commit to memory, was a graduate from some Conurbation Two college and Corbin had little use for him today. He left the boy where he stood with a list of dull administrative tasks, and instructions to check with him should it at any point look like an actual decision was required.

The sleek, black ambassadorial car waited in the street outside the Director's residence, flanked by the bulkier, unmarked Enforcer patrol vehicles.

'Sorry for the delay, Director,' said the driver, as they approached the car. Corbin waved the apology aside.

'It wasn't your fault,' he said as he squeezed himself into the back seat next to Joao's broad-shouldered bulk. 'It was an unusual request.'

'Yes sir,' the driver replied, careful not to ask the obvious question.

However, as they made their way through the clear, well-ordered roads of the central administrative district and Corbin made casual conversation with the driver, the man appeared quite happy to give up his guarded formality. Corbin supposed he shouldn't be surprised the man was keen to chat like friends - to say that Vash was an aloof boss was an understatement.

As they finally passed beyond the boundaries of Conurbation One, the driver gave Corbin the opening he needed to broach the subject of Vash.

'So, how come you asked for me specifically?' he said.

'I haven't yet found replacements for all Meyer's staff. I need to be able to trust them and I know Vash trusts you,' said Corbin, by way of explanation. It wasn't entirely untrue.

Outside the window mile after mile of monoculture rushed past, some of the crops in open fields, others greenhoused. The greenery had been refreshing at first after the grey of the Conurbation, but the repetitive view quickly grew tedious. Lots of GM sugarcane. Corbin had heard that the Dyn could eat it and enjoyed the taste, and it could be processed to make the biofuels that most vehicles used.

'You know Vash well then?'

'Well...' said Corbin, smiling ruefully. 'As well as anyone, I guess.'

'I feel I've said more to you in the last hour than I'd say to Vash in a year,' the driver chuckled. 'And I've been his driver since I started.' Corbin's heart sunk - but what had he expected? That somebody like Vash must have a true confidante? Maybe Vash did, Corbin might never know, but as far as plans for how to proceed went it seemed pretty futile. Still, he decided to press on, in the hope there was anything he could use.

'What I say to you now has to stay between us,' Corbin cautioned. The driver nodded.

'Wouldn't have kept my job this long if I didn't understand that. Or my head for that matter.'

'Vash has been missing for a couple of days. I was wondering if he said anything strange when you last chauffeured him?' The driver looked genuinely concerned.

'You asking in a personal or professional capacity?' asked the driver, conspicuously eyeing Corbin's uniform and then Joao.

'Personal, I promise,' replied Corbin sincerely. The man sighed.

'I don't really have anything I'm afraid. I guess he seemed on edge... maybe more distracted than usual?' He was clutching at straws, just trying to be helpful. Corbin had that effect on people.

'Don't worry about it. I only thought I'd ask.'

'I hope he's alright. He's a good guy. I don't buy all this ‘puppet ruler’ stuff you sometimes hear - it doesn't fit him at all. He's kind, you know? He made sure my daughter got good treatment when she was ill - I mean really ill - and he's given me a bar of chocolate for her, for her birthday, every year since,' the driver enthused.

'I didn't know that,' said Corbin. It was another facet to Vash, but it was hardly useful information.

'That's what I mean though. Some people act nice just because it gets them something. He just is.'

Corbin let the conversation die and before long, the imposing InSec building loomed before them. A brutalist slab that resembled a tombstone, it was sharpy lit by harsh lighting that banished all shadow, as if to emphasise that there was nowhere to hide.

The car drew up alongside the structure, uniformed Enforcers opening the door. Corbin walked through the main entrance, returning the salutes of the two Enforcers on guard and entering the narrow, brightly lit corridor. People turned to stare at him, and some saluted as he passed. The bustling crowds of administrators cleared away before him. Without any explicit decision, ‘acting’ was beginning to drop from the acting Ambassador’s title. The remaining question was whether the rest of the Directorate would accept him.

Corbin’s lips curved up into a smile as he contemplated the approaching meeting. Handling the spooks that made up his old department would be difficult - they dealt in human lives on a daily basis, and they’d be bewildered by yesterday’s events, but it was a difficulty he was used to, even relished. Vash might remain a mystery, but ordinary human selfishness was a simple thing to understand and control. He'd sometimes doubted if Vash was human at all: at bottom, the man seemed to be motivated by nothingness. And as for the Dyn themselves - all this would be irrelevant if they stepped in to end it all.

Regardless, Corbin expected he’d be able to bamboozle the rest of Internal Security into ignoring the events on the coast. It was easy enough to elicit the correct reaction from people, as long as you approached the issue correctly. When it came to InSec’s officers, he’d subtly hint that it would harm their careers if they took the matter too seriously.

An Enforcer swung the door to the conference room open for Corbin. Papers and glasses of water were scattered on the large ersatz wood table. A dozen serious-looking men and women stared back at their superior. He waited expectantly, then one of the men stood up, giving a brief respectful nod. Over the next few seconds, the others followed.

‘Ambassador, thank you for joining us,’ said one officer.

Corbin sat and the others followed a moment later. He suppressed the strong desire to smile and said,

‘It's been an eventful couple of days, ladies and gentlemen. I suggest we begin by discussing the matter of Vash’s successor.’

Chapter 16: Submersion

Bright green eyes. A jungle, claustrophobic and humid. The unfamiliar weight of a gun in his hand. A grey beach beneath a grey sky, detonations echoing off cliffs and clouds, the sting of salt in a wound. A final, apocalyptic flash. The sea boiling above them. These images - no, memories, sleeted through his vision. Gradually, the events of the day settled into a coherent narrative and sensation flooded back.

Vash willed his eyes open. Light stabbed at his retinas and set off a pounding headache. At least the bullet graze in his shoulder was now subdued, if only because dozens of further pains were queuing up to make themselves known.

The disorientation slowly lifted and he began to make sense of his surroundings. The bathyscaphe cabin was so cramped that there was hardly room to walk five paces in any direction. The Dyn lay off to his left, its serpentine form coiled in on itself. Around him, nameless revolutionaries lolled unconscious in their seats; a shaven headed woman, a giant of a man, and another slumped against one wall, lank hair obscuring his features.

Christo was in the seat opposite. His skin, where it wasn’t darkened by bruises, looked ghostly in the dim, actinic light. His shallow, irregular breathing sounded muffled under an oxygen mask. Aurelie knelt by his side, concern etched onto her face. Her hands moved with the inhuman precision of the arms of a 3D printer. She glanced over her shoulder.

‘You’re awake.’

Vash stood and straightened himself as much as the low ceiling would allow. His back felt as though it had been subjected to an industrial stress test; the catamaran had pulled rocket gees on its brief skip across the ocean. As he crossed over to Aurelie he felt a slight lurch. They were still descending.

‘How long was I out for?’ he asked.

‘Not long, little more than a minute,’ Aurelie replied absently. ‘Here, lift his arms.’

She finished stitching the ugly gash in Christo’s torso and wiped it clean with antiseptic. Vash did as he was asked, which allowed Aurelie to replace the improvised bandages that had bound Christo’s torso with fresh ones. An ominous red stain bloomed through them.

‘There’s nothing more I can do,’ she murmured, noticing his gaze. ‘There’s internal bleeding and his lungs are flooded - I’m giving him oxygen but he’s lost too much blood already and there’s nothing I can do about that.’ She wrung her bloody hands, then seemed to grow self-conscious and stilled them.

Vash searched for something to say and found nothing. He wasn’t good at comfort, and doubted Aurelie would want some trite reassurance. Christo’s eyes flickered just below the threshold of consciousness.

‘Aurelie, if he’s dying… perhaps it would be best to ease his passing?’ Vash asked softly, aware that Christo might still be able to hear.

‘He’s got time. He’d want to see it through,’ she said, with a finality that brooked no further questions. Aurelie turned her unflinching gaze on Vash, her eyes conveying more than words ever could.

‘What about the others?’

‘Tuva, Jan, Pao,’ she said, indicating each of them in turn. ‘I’ve checked; some cuts, a few bruises but nothing significant. They’ll be awake soon.’

‘As for the Dyn…’ she continued, spreading her hands. ‘I’m unsure. It’s been motionless since it entered the bathyscaphe. It might be dormant, but for all I know it could just be pretending.’

They both looked at it uneasily.

‘We’ll keep it restrained,’ Vash said, sounding much more assured than he felt. It was a risk keeping the Dyn alive, but a calculated one. K’txl’s maddening remarks weighed heavily on his mind. Perhaps this Dyn might be able to provide some answers. Perhaps there was a way out of this that avoided further bloodshed.

To Vash’s surprise, Aurelie nodded in agreement.

‘There’s some rope, but we have nothing sufficient to keep it immobilised if it decides otherwise. We’ll keep the laser trained on it, but I really don’t want to have to use it. Not in here.’

‘It concerns me,’ Vash said, after a pause. ‘It could have escaped, yet it didn’t. It wanted to be here.’

‘The more important question is what bargain it made with Jan, although I think I can guess. But these are questions for later. We can’t risk confrontation now - we’ll take our willing prisoner with us.’

It wasn’t long before the others woke. Vash had expected them to regard him with suspicion, but he was more concerned by the barely disguised hostility in the glances exchanged between Tuva, Jan and Aurelie. It was clear why. They would have died on that beach if they’d followed Aurelie’s orders. Her plan might not have explicitly required their deaths, but they were not supposed to be on the bathyscaphe.

Having allowed them a few moments to come to, Aurelie addressed the last survivors of Christo’s Revolution. But there was no rousing speech, nor gentle reassurance, only a reel of practical concerns.

‘Vash, Jan, update our list of inventory, then get everything stowed away. Pao, help me check the bathyscaphe for damage. Tuva, take this,’ she said, handing her the laser. ‘Guard the Dyn.’

Vash watched this unfold with growing unease. Even an outsider like him could see that Aurelie didn’t command their loyalties as Christo had, but they did as asked without complaint. At this point, what else could be done?

Bundles of supplies and equipment had come loose during the chaotic first moments of their descent, and Vash and Jan began to gather them up. Jan was unlike the others, all of them recruits from the Conurbations, marked for life by the faded tattoos of gangs and identification barcodes. Whilst their years on the outside had changed them Jan was a wastelander through and through; wiry, with heavily tanned skin and uncut, matted hair.

‘How did you come to join Christo, Jan?’

‘Stole food from some warlord, he wanted to take my hand,’ Jan said.

‘Sounds like an interesting story,’ Vash prompted.

‘It’s not. I was hungry.’

‘What did you do before you joined?’

‘Stop digging,’ Jan snapped. ‘Christo obviously wants you here. But I don’t care if you think you’ve been fighting the good fight from the inside, or if you’re trying to convince yourself that you have. As far as I’m concerned you’re an Arco man. I’ve got nothing to say to you.’

‘I didn’t mean to - ’

‘Let’s just get this done.’.

Vash couldn’t say he was surprised. Arco was hated by the people it governed, and he was tolerated as a necessity at best by those within. They finished their task in sullen silence.

When they reconvened the situation looked even more dire than before.

‘The bathyscaphe took little damage, all things considered. Some of the controls aren't too responsive and we are descending slower than I'd like -’ Aurelie began.

‘What's that supposed to mean?’ Tuva demanded.

‘The hull has taken some damage, but we should be safe to descend. I can't really say more than that - it's not like we can go outside to check. Other than that a couple of the batteries don't seem to be working. I'll see what I can do from in here.’

‘Until then we'll keep power usage to a minimum. Vash, Jan, what's our supply situation?’ she inquired.

‘The previous list of inventory looks largely aspirational,’ said Vash grimly, handing Aurelie a piece of paper with about half of the items crossed out.

‘The food and water supplies are going to be a problem,’  Jan continued. ‘Some must have been lost when we had to separate from the catamaran.’

Aurelie scanned over the list.

‘We'll ration it as much as we can.’

‘Medical supplies could also be an issue… ’ Jan added, not having to say why.

‘We'll manage,’ insisted Aurelie. Vash imagined that even if they had half as many supplies she would say the same, but he kept quiet. The mood was already poisonous enough.

It was Tuva who finally blew.

‘If nobody else is gonna say anything then I guess I’ll have to be the one to ask the obvious question. We’re out here to find something, something worth all the shit we’ve been through, right? So, will we even be able to get there? How far do we have to go?’ she demanded.

‘Roughly nine-hundred kilometres,’ said Aurelie. A direct answer to a direct question.

‘Roughly nine-hundred kilometres?’ Tuva asked. ‘Is that eight-hundred and ninety-nine? Or nine-hundred and one? As if that makes the slightest difference. All this quibbling about power and supplies is literally a waste of breath. We’ll have suffocated before we cover even a tenth of that distance. Over fifty people died on that beach, we’re going to die down here and you’re still trying to pretend your plan is all going to work out just fine!’

‘I’ll cut back the oxygen supply as much as I can -’ Aurelie began. Tuva didn’t even let her finish.

‘That’s fiddling at the margins and you know it,’ she said, jabbing an accusing finger. ‘The catamaran was supposed to take us way out there, over our target, with just enough air for the descent, some time at the bottom, and the ascent, right? There’s no way we can make the kind of journey you’re talking about.’ The words poured from her; better to be angry than to despair.

‘And although I’m sure you’ve already considered it, I’m going to say it out loud ‘cos I think it’s worth making really bloody clear, Aurelie, you wouldn’t be able to make it even if you were the only one breathing the air.’

‘We need to resurface, it’s the only choice.’ Pao agreed, although Vash noticed that Jan remained curiously quiet throughout the exchange.

A fit of coughing from Christo silenced them. Aurelie was immediately by his side, moving to lift his mask and wipe the bloody spittle from his lips. He waved her away. She started to say something about saving his strength but he cut her off.

‘Tuva, if we release the ballast, that’s it, that’s the end of the Revolution,’ he said, his voice barely above a strained whisper. He took a deep, shuddering drag from the oxygen mask. ‘All those who sacrificed everything to get us this far will have died for nothing.’

‘We could resupply, make another attempt… ’ Tuva offered lamely.

‘How long do you give the six of us once we resurface? The Dyn will find us, and they will not hesitate this time.’

‘Then what do we do? I’d rather take my chances at the surface.’

‘We have another option,’ Christo managed, before another coughing fit cut him short.

‘We use the deep sound channel,’ Aurelie explained for him. ‘It’s an oceanographic phenomenon. A burst of sound at the right depth will propagate like light in an optical fibre; internal reflection. It will spread outward, not upward or downward. Low frequency sound waves within the channel can travel thousands of kilometres before dissipating.’

‘Those charges you had me attach to the hull…’ wondered Pao.

‘Exactly. By detonating them in sequence we can encode a message that should be readable across a vast distance. So we keep submerged for as long as we possibly can and hope that that which we seek comes looking for us,’

‘Well, it’s a better plan than anything I’ve got,’ conceded Tuva. She looked more defeated than convinced. Vash glanced at the others. Jan was impressed, he could see, though he was retaining his scepticism. Finally, he spoke up.

‘I don’t understand - you said there was a weapon down there, left behind by those before. Left for us so that we could fight back, right? How does a weapon understand a message? How does it come looking for us?’

Aurelie hesitated, as though unsure how much to say. Vash understood that. Spend long enough carefully managing people’s perceptions and eventually just telling the truth took conscious effort. But Jan knew what questions to ask, and Vash felt he was owed a proper explanation. They all were.

‘If Aurelie’s… if we’re right about what’s down there, then it's not a weapon in the sense you’re imagining,’ he said.

‘What are you on about?’ demanded Pao. Vash tried to fit the concepts to words they might understand.

‘To call it a weapon is a simplification. What Christo and Aurelie seek is a warseed. In itself it’s not a weapon, but a machine designed to grow into one. Given sufficient time it can create copies of itself that will take root and blossom, just as a plant does. And like a plant it can adapt to its surroundings. In the same way Dynic plants jostle for sunlight without having to understand what it is they do or why they do it, so the warseed can respond to our message - it’s just following its programming and doing what it was designed to do.’

Jan chewed that over for a moment.

‘But how can its designers have known? My daughter once told me that she thought many of the Dynic plants were able to move because they were adapted to a world where the sun was fixed in the sky - they had to be able to fight for position. But here they are…’ Jan struggled to remember the word. ‘Maladapted. They waste their energy constantly trying to chase the sun, fighting the same battles day after day. How can you know the warseed isn’t also maladapted? That this world isn’t the right fit for it anymore?’

It was Aurelie’s turn to look impressed.

‘Your daughter was a remarkable girl, to realise so much. But the analogy isn’t perfect. Dynic life was shaped by blind evolutionary forces. The warseed was designed,’ she said.

‘Still sounds like faith to me,’ Jan muttered.

‘You wouldn’t say that if you understood the nature of its designer. The Utilitaria will have already anticipated anything I could conceive of. It will have had contingency plans for every outcome, no matter how faint the possibility.’

‘The Utilitaria... we’ve all heard the stories. But what you’re describing sounds like God. It designs living things. It protects its flock. It knows everything you’re going to do, even before you know to do it. And the whole sorry world ticks along to its plan, not that it ever sees fit to explain itself to lowly humans,’ Jan laughed bitterly. ‘The only difference is the evangelistas demand a leap of faith, whilst you insist it’s not necessary.’

‘Call it whatever you like,’ Aurelie snapped.

‘You know why I never believed in God, Aurelie?’ asked Jan, his voice hardening. ‘Cos if this was His plan, the bastard’s got a sick sense of humour.’

Christo laughed at that, unable to help himself, though clearly it pained him. Aurelie’s face remained serious.

‘Listen,’ she said, growing insistent. ‘Imagine the scenario. You outmatch your enemy in every way, but your weapons can only be brought to use after a lengthy delay. Your mind is so fast that you can experience a subjective decade in the moments it takes a single impulse to travel along a single neuron in your enemy’s mind. But they have moved first. They can kill billions of people in minutes, and they threaten to do so immediately if you do not obliterate yourself. A billion people have already died, a demonstration of their resolve. If you had a week, they would be no threat at all, but you do not have five minutes. What do you do?’

‘You fake your own death. Then you hide, and arm yourself in secret. You return with overwhelming force and strike before they can retaliate,’ Christo replied as though speaking from a well-rehearsed script. His eyes glinted.

‘But where to hide? Space is empty, and vacuum is permeable to radiation. They will spot the heat from your construction anywhere in space or the Earth’s surface. They will certainly spot the heat of your engines. So where do you hide your secret weapon? Somewhere that can be reached in minutes without engines or drills, with plentiful energy and an easy way to stealthily dissipate heat.’

‘Underwater,’ said Vash, picking up on Aurelie’s chain of reasoning. ‘But it could be anywhere.’

‘I suspect,’ said Aurelie. ‘That it can be here, if it needs to be.’

‘But why you?’ Jan blurted out. ‘That’s what I’m asking. If the Utilitaria was all-powerful, why would it not simply build its weapons in secrecy, then wipe out the Dyn? Why hasn’t it done that already? What does it need you and Vash for?’

‘It's gone,’ said Vash and Aurelie together. They glanced at one another, sharing a look of mutual recognition. By silent accord, Aurelie spoke up.

‘The Utilitaria was designed to make unbreakable promises. Precommitment, they called it. It was a safety measure born of harsh experience. The Dyn forced it into a binding promise to annihilate itself and so it self-destructed, totally. Like a calculator adding numbers, it couldn’t disobey once the command was given. It sacrificed itself and gave us a fighting chance. There is a machine waiting down there, but there’s nothing controlling it.’

‘And so, you deduced their grand plan, based on nothing but memories and whispers,’ Christo smiled fondly.

‘No voice of God, no prophecy or chosen one,’ Aurelie said.

Tuva looked as though she might be about to say something dismissive, but the words died in her throat. Pao looked blank; he seemed to have checked out of the conversation long ago.

‘It will either be true, or a beautiful dream. I’m glad to have been a part of it, either way,’ Christo said. Then, summoning up as much strength as he could muster, he turned to address them collectively.

‘Comrades, I’d be lying if I said this is how I wanted things to turn out. But hope remains. You must trust each other, you must become the bridge between -’ he paused to take a breath. ‘Between what is and what should be. Find the warseed. Bring down the heavens, save the future. Trust each other. And above all, trust Aurelie.’

Aurelie wrapped a foil blanket round the dying Christo’s shoulders and curled up against him. Her eyes glistened in the dim blue light. Vash moved to look out the porthole, his back turned so that he might grant them what little privacy the cramped conditions allowed.

‘I'm sorry,' he heard Aurelie whisper, her voice breaking, barely audible above Christo's rasping breath and the quiet hum of the bathyscaphe around them. ‘I'm sorry. All this had to be done. I regret none of it. But I’m still sorry. I sold you a vision that you’ll never live to see. I made you complicit in leading others to their deaths. I -’

‘I’m no fool, Aurelie. I chose this,’ Christo reassured her. A sudden grin lit up his face. ‘Besides, I’m not letting you take all the credit.’

They had been descending for about twenty minutes when Aurelie silently brushed past Vash, taking a seat beside him in what passed for the control room. Behind them, Pao had taken over from Tuva in guarding the Dyn and Jan had dozed off in his seat besides Christo, exhausted by the day’s events.

Aurelie began tapping at what looked like an old computer keyboard bolted to the console, then glanced briefly up at a narrow LED display on which new commands appeared. The low rumble of the engine shifted tone slightly. One of the analogue displays on the console flipped from red to green. Vash thought it was a dial that represented buoyancy fluid pressure. After a moment he turned and spoke to Aurelie, his voice low.

‘Tell me Aurelie, why did you need me? Because I still don’t know why you risked it. I asked you on the beach but you didn’t answer.’

‘Insurance. Two is better than one,’ she said. ‘And we only have one chance.’

Despite everything, Vash smiled. It was obvious. Indeed, he’d suspected as much ever since he’d met her.

‘I wasn’t the only survivor,’ he said. Aurelie nodded. Her own smile was sadder, more wistful.

‘I have had a very long time to consider this plan. I had to grasp at every advantage I could reach for.’

‘I could have sabotaged everything,’ Vash said. ‘I could have betrayed your symbol’s meaning to the Dyn, or to Arco.’

‘I know who you are, Vash. You don’t work like that.’

Her answer only served to unsettle him. Vash heard a certainty in her tone that he had never truly felt. There was an ineffable brightness in her eyes that he’d never see reflected in his own. He asked another question.

‘And that figure, nine hundred kilometers; where did it come from?’

‘An ocean trench is the logical place to deploy the warseed; maximum depth provides maximum stealth. As I said, I have had a very long time to consider this.’

Vash paused. It went entirely without saying that this hardly narrowed the scope of their search, but she had just admitted as much. This was a logical place to look. It could be here if it needed to be.

‘Your plan, it makes sense when you look at it in the broadest terms… ’ Vash conceded. ‘But how can you be sure of the details? How can you know that the warseed will be there, now, as you expect? Perhaps it came up with a plan even more subtle and even more assured of success.’

‘It won’t have done so. As I must attempt to predict what the Utilitaria did, it will have modelled what someone in my position is likely to be capable of doing. Maybe there is a better strategy, but its plan can’t work if there is nobody to set it in motion. It left something for us to find, so it must have expected us to look for it. Since we are here, it must have expected us to be here.’

Did any of that actually make sense? Vash paused, measuring his next words carefully.

‘I fear Jan is right, Aurelie, in spite of what I know of the Utilitaria. It can’t hear our prayers. It can’t have known that you’d try this precise plan nearly two centuries before you formulated it.’

‘Perhaps it didn’t know every detail, but it knew enough. Now we just have to complete the final step.’

‘A final leap of faith?’

‘If you like.’

Aurelie turned back to the console, entering another sequence of commands. For a moment, it seemed as though nothing had happened. Then, there was a soft clang, then a pair of muffled cracks like gunshots. Then two in sequence, drumming a rapid tattoo on the hull. It was Morse Code; a letter ‘D’, if you assumed the simultaneous implosions represented dashes. As the sequence of snapping sounds continued, either one charge detonating or two at once, Vash mentally pieced it together: DRAGONS TEETH. Then there was silence once more, engulfing them like the black ocean pressing down on the hull.

Vash wondered if anything was listening. He stared out into the void beyond the porthole and imagined the sounds from their charges echoing endlessly beneath the waves.

Chapter 17: Revelation

‘Be it so. This burning of widows is your custom; prepare the funeral pile. But my nation has also a custom. When men burn women alive we hang them, and confiscate all their property. My carpenters shall therefore erect gibbets on which to hang all concerned when the widow is consumed. Let us all act according to national customs.’

Charles James Napier

‘I nominate Corbin for the role of Ambassador in perpetuity,’ said Reeve after a brief exchange of formalities.

Up to this point the meeting itself was a formality; it was rare for anyone to propose a motion without knowing that they would win. All the important work had already been done. The members of the Security Council glanced at each other briefly, then raised their hands in unison. An aide made a note that the motion had passed. And that was that.

Sander Reeve was the youngest of those gathered here, but was already making a name for himself. Sensing opportunity, he had aligned himself with Corbin. Reeve flashed him a grin, all perfect white teeth and dead, ice-blue eyes.

‘I’m honoured to have been chosen for this office. I shall endeavour to continue the diligent work of my predecessor,’ said Corbin, smiling magnanimously.

‘Of course, none of this will matter if the Dyn refuse to accept you,’ said Koslov, Director-General of the Department of Internal Security. Corbin nodded serenely.

‘I will make the call to the Dyn and announce my candidacy as soon as I return to the Hollow Tower.’ It was Koslov’s turn to smile. Corbin got the impression of a shark contemplating its prey.

‘It’s already been arranged. You should expect their call. As you are Vash’s natural successor I doubt there will be a problem.’

Corbin kept his expression carefully neutral. So the Ambassador wasn’t the only one with a direct line to the Dyn - he shouldn’t have been surprised. The subtext was obvious. Remember where the real power lies.

‘Now that that’s dealt with, I propose the Council turn its attention to the other item on the agenda,’ suggested Alarcón, the Americas’ sharp-eyed general, who had left just enough time for Koslov’s words to sink in. ‘I assume you’ve all seen the footage. Reeve, would you like to bring us up to speed on your investigation?’

‘We’ve examined the crater left by the Dynic strike, not that there’s much to examine. There’s nothing left; no wreckage, nothing to indicate what the revolutionaries were doing.’

‘No clues there then,’ sighed Alarcón.

‘No. However there’s reason to suspect somebody may have gotten off the beach,’ continued Reeve, robotically. ‘We have surveillance footage from a high altitude drone showing a catamaran fleeing the area in the moments prior to the strike. It was also caught by the blast but was carrying  what looked like a submarine, of which there is no sign.’

‘A sea-skimming submarine?’ smirked Zhao, Secretary-General of something - Corbin had seldom crossed paths with her. Reeve nodded humourlessly.

‘I feel it is also important to note that the footage provided by the Dyn omits this detail, in direct contradiction of our own intel.’

A couple of those present looked as though they were about to ask the obvious, but none yet seemed ready to bring up the question of Vash’s fate.

‘So the Dyn are hiding something?’ prompted Koslov.

‘It appears so. My suspicions were confirmed by a second omission. A passive sonar net off the coast detected a very unusual signature. The anomaly was very deep underwater and moving rapidly - easily supersonic. From the speed it must be a supercavitating torpedo, but it far surpasses anything we have. Or the Dyn for that matter. Strictly speaking, taking into account the depth and estimated speed, what we observed wasn’t possible.’ Reeve passed the relevant intel around the table.

‘This is news to me,’ admitted Corbin.

‘As I say, it was only noticed hours after the fact, once we belatedly received Dynic surveillance data and were able to compare the two sets,’ explained Reeve.

‘I think I speak for the entire Council when I say that we were quite disappointed to only discover the severity of the situation when we lost several dozen soldiers and a square kilometre of coastline in a Dynic strike yesterday,’ snarled Alarcón, his ire clearly directed at Corbin. ‘Leaving us to figure out what happened after the fact. Now our esteemed former Ambassador is missing in action, but what was he doing in a warzone in the first place?’

‘It’s simple. The man’s cracked,’ said Zhao. She turned conspiratorially towards Koslov. ‘I’ve never trusted him, but it’s quite clear that he’s finally lost touch with reality.’

Corbin smiled blandly.

‘Well, thank you for offering that diagnosis,’ he said, only just stopping short of rolling his eyes. Zhao looked as though she was about to say something more, opened her mouth and then shut it.

‘Make it easy for us, Corbin,’ said Koslov, reasonably. ‘Tell us what you know.’

‘On Vash’s behalf, I issued a request for information regarding the revolution’s insignia days ago and received nothing. So how about you tell me what you know first and then I’ll reciprocate.’

‘You really think you can address us like that?’ Zhao demanded, but the others weren’t interested, their focus on Koslov instead. Koslov made a subtle gesture at an uncomfortable looking Reeve.

‘I looked into the insignia as part of my own investigations,’ Reeve coughed, clearing his throat. ‘The revolutionary group was unremarkable, obscure. They never amounted to more than about a hundred members, most now presumed dead. Until they took the Dynic hostage and hijacked the crawler they’d never attempted an operation anywhere near as audacious as this.’

‘They kept a low profile,’ confirmed Alarcón. ‘Military intelligence didn’t even have a file on them until a few months ago.’

‘More than that. Their behaviour, even discounting the events of the last few days, was unusual to say the least. The picture became more concerning when I got a hit for dragon’s teeth from the archives,’ Reeve elaborated, before turning to Corbin to address him directly. ‘The symbol was a direct match. It’s a codename. Old tech; a type of self-replicating weapon.’

‘Self-replicating?’ Corbin pressed, unable to disguise his interest. Reeve’s subterfuge could be ignored for the moment.

More printouts were handed round; everything they had on dragon’s teeth.

‘They called it a warseed,’ said Reeve, sounding reverent. ‘It’s a machine that makes war, soaking up surrounding matter and twisting it, turning it into weaponry. Powerful beyond belief. We think they must have picked up the name from some old legend, then used the symbol to get our attention, for their own unguessable reasons.’

‘Perhaps,’ Corbin said distractedly as he scanned down the page. It was cluttered with annotations, giving context and explaining unfamiliar terminology. His mind spun back to the look of shock on Vash’s face. Now that he knew what Vash had seen in the symbol, everything else he’d said and done fell into place.

That was the thing about Vash; he could seem unpredictable because he simply followed his own sense of duty wherever it led him. Apparently, it had now led him beneath the sea to awaken an unimaginable weapon.

‘So there you have it, Corbin, everything we know,’ said Koslov, spreading his hands, softly spoken as ever. ‘Your turn.’

Corbin had contemplated lying, but something told him now wasn’t the time for reticence. He had to admit, he had underestimated them. They already had most the pieces of the puzzle, after all.

‘As I’m sure you’re aware, Vash had a direct meeting with the Dyn, conversing with one that introduced itself as Liar to Animals. What’s not on record is that the Dynic Ambassador informed Vash that its heir had been taken hostage and insisted that he resolve the situation himself, involving as few people as possible.’

‘Have you speculated as to why that might be?’ Koslov inquired.

‘Vash said that this Dyn was unlike the others; most notably, it spoke through a human conduit.’ Corbin paused for a moment whilst Alarcón and a few of the others made sounds of disgusted disapproval. ‘The Dyn was concerned that if its line looked to be threatened then others would move against it, Dyn from a hardline faction apparently pushing for the immediate extermination of humanity.’

That got their attention. The members of the Security Council murmured anxiously among themselves until Koslov silenced them.

‘So Vash, with your help, did as he was asked and attempted to secure the hostage? How do you explain the Ambassador’s abrupt change of heart?’

‘Vash didn’t have a change of heart,’ Corbin replied smoothly. ‘Although I thought we were simply doing the Dyn’s bidding, I believe he intended to contact the revolution from the outset. He recognised that symbol and understood its implication. He saw an opportunity to do his duty and seized it.’

‘His duty?’ thundered Alarcón. ‘His duty, as Ambassador, is to act as a mouthpiece for the Dyn. His duty, in service to Arco, is to protect the people. Instead he has failed to resolve the hostage situation and in doing so has put the entire world in jeopardy. Even as we speak, this hardline faction of the Dyn may be moving to implement their final solution. Certainly his actions will have bolstered their cause.’

‘I never took you for a Quisling, Alarcón,’ retorted Corbin. ‘Look around you. Can you honestly say that the people are protected from the depredations of the Dyn? The only thing that’s protected is the status quo. Vash, the man you decried as a puppet, is the only one behaving as though he isn’t. If we are to claim to be anything more than a puppet government, then we must act in the interests of the people we serve. It is not in their interests that the occupation lasts a moment longer than necessary,’ he finished.

‘Careful, Corbin… ’ cautioned Koslov. ‘You’re beginning to sound like a revolutionary yourself.’

‘You can’t possibly mean they had a warseed on that vehicle?’ someone demanded, to general assent. ‘Do you honestly expect us to believe the word of an unstable struldbrug and his rebel propaganda?’

‘I don’t expect you to take my word on any of it,’ Corbin said. ‘I expect you to wait and see. Reeve’s observations alone are enough to show that there are forces in motion that we do not yet understand. There is greater risk in acting prematurely, before we have all the facts.’

‘This world stands on the brink of annihilation and you suggest we wait and see? I have heard enough,’ Alarcón shouted, slamming his fist down on the table. He stood to leave, his retinue and a handful of allies following suit. ‘I sincerely hope - and not just for your sake - that your trust in Vash is not misplaced. Such a spectacular miscalculation would carry dire consequences.’

With that Alarcón marched from the room, aides and lesser generals tripping over each others heels to keep up. An uneasy quiet settled over the room.

‘Alarcón has a point,’ conceded one of the remaining generals, breaking the silence. ‘I shouldn’t have to remind anyone here that a sword hangs over all our heads. And I’m not talking about the pebbles they’ve flung at us thus far. The Dyn have a dozen asteroids in steep elliptical orbits - the tiniest nudge of thrust and the firmament comes crashing down on us. Even one impact could render the Earth’s surface virtually lifeless. It is quite a gamble you’re suggesting.’

‘We make that gamble every day the occupation continues,’ Corbin said, unconvinced. ‘If anything it speaks to the Dynic character that it hasn’t happened already. Just think! If a fanatical element got control of even one of those rocks they could kill billions.’

‘That’s why we work with the moderates and trust them to police their own. Vash, by taking this unprecedented course, has undermined this strategy,’ said Zhao, exasperated.

‘Appeasement won’t work forever,’ came Corbin’s blunt reply.

‘Enough,’ insisted Koslov. ‘This meeting has gone on long enough and is getting nowhere. Regardless of the merits of a new approach to our relationship with those above, these decisions were not Vash’s to make, nor are they yours, Ambassador. However, I agree with Corbin’s assessment that given the current state of affairs we must act carefully. We remain vigilant and we put everyone on high alert.

Reeve, you are to continue your investigation. And Corbin, when you receive your courtesy call from the Dyn, see if you can discern whether we are still dealing with the murderous bastard we know, as opposed to the even more murderous bastards we don’t.’

A chorus of confirmation sounded from around the table and the meeting broke up. The various members of the Security Council collected their papers and departed silently, exchanging respectful nods. There was a charge in the air, a sense of impending upheaval, but nothing concrete.

Corbin stayed behind, reviewing the meeting in his mind. It had been fraught, but Corbin relished such exchanges. Crucially, he had the support of the Council; as long as Koslov remained behind him, so would the majority of the others. Tentative and conditional though it was, this support would be enough. For his part Corbin could only hope that the revolution would succeed. What an irony that was.

Just as he was about to leave there was a knock on the door. An aide entered.

‘Sir, before you leave for Conurbation One, Koslov would like to see you in his office.’

Koslov met him at the door, waving the aide away.

‘Make sure we’re not disturbed,’ he instructed the guards as he beckoned Corbin inside.

The office was vast and yet cluttered with the detritus of the past; a dozen pieces of exquisitely formed furniture jostled for space and every surface was scattered with objets d’art. An entire wall was filled with a bookcase, another by a sweeping picture window that flooded the room with light.

‘You’ll forgive our mutual friend. Alarcón is under immense pressure. The revolutionaries themselves may have died in the strike, but a dozen copycat movements have sprung up in their place. Some of the footage must have leaked. That damned dragon’s tooth is everywhere.’

‘I’m sure someone as experienced as General Alarcón can handle it,’ said Corbin, contemptuously.

‘Of course. Far more concerning is that the Dyn are acting unilaterally - they’re only hitting militants out in the wasteland for the moment, but we cannot rule out an escalation. Conurbation Fifteen is on the brink of an outright uprising. Anyway,’ Koslov said, waving his hand dismissively, ‘That’s not what I called you up here to discuss. Have a seat.’

‘Drink?’ he asked, once Corbin was sitting, indicating a cut glass decanter filled with golden liquid. It looked incredibly expensive and had probably been distilled before the fall. Koslov poured him a glass without waiting for an answer, then poured himself one.

Corbin thanked him, taking a sip before setting the glass aside.

‘I suggest you finish it,’ Koslov said, no hint of humour in his voice. Corbin did so, his curiosity piqued.

‘Just what is it you called me in here for?’

‘You already know that we’ve kept certain information from the Ambassador’s office,’ said Koslov, crossing over to the expansive windows to lower the blackout blinds. ‘It was regrettable but I hardly need to explain it to you. Some information is too dangerous to be free.’

‘I worked for this department long enough to understand that. I have served Arco long enough to understand that.’

‘Indeed. But you must also know that Arco is as riven by factionalism as any institution. Those factions and individuals, from the merest regional Directorate to the Ambassadorial office, do not always act on the information they have in a way that serves the interests of the whole.’

‘And what interests might those be?’

‘The preservation of Arco, of its monopoly on power and this delicate equilibrium, of course.’

‘Naturally best served by the Department of Internal Security,’ Corbin smirked.

‘Come, Corbin. Don’t play devil’s advocate with me. There’s no crowd to play to here. If InSec does not serve such interests, then what is its purpose? Surely you are not naive enough to toy with ideas of revolution? The rebels and their sympathisers are a threat to us all. Vash has become a threat.’

‘If you brought me in here for a lecture, you’re wasting your time,’ said Corbin.

‘I brought you in here because 	I believe I can trust you, Corbin. With one of our own in the role of Ambassador I expect that we’ll have a much more productive working relationship with the office,’ said Koslov, making his way over to the bureau. Corbin resisted an urge to roll his eyes at the attempted flattery.

Koslov fished a small key from his pocket, unlocked one of the drawers and removed a nondescript brown envelope from it. ‘What I’m about to show you doesn’t leave this room, understand? Only members of the Security Council have seen it. Consider it an initiation.’

‘I’m flattered,’ joked Corbin. Koslov shot him a withering look.

‘We’re here at the sufferance of the Dyn. Never forget that,’ said Koslov as he slipped a reel of microfilm from the envelope. ‘The Broadcast makes it perfectly clear what they’re capable of.’

‘I can practically hear the capital B. What’s it a broadcast of? What’s its provenance?’

‘It’s Dynic in origin, that much we know. It was relayed to Earth by the ship that made first contact with the Dyn. Unfortunately it arrived a decade too late and succeeded only in causing significant distress. After that all copies but this one were destroyed. The subject matter is… disturbing.’

‘Yes, all very ominous. Let’s get this over with,’ sighed Corbin.

Koslov inserted the reel into a projector. The projector whirred and displayed a flickering white square on the wall opposite as he took a seat beside Corbin. Then the Broadcast began.

There was no sound, only the image of a planet against the black backdrop of space. It was cloaked in cloud, one side bathed in brightness and the other lost in the dark, whilst storms swirled in the narrow twilight strip between the two. The view shifted to an image of a planetary surface taken from an aircraft. Armies were charging at each other as rockets arced overhead, fronts dozens of kilometres wide running with whatever the Dyn used for blood. Like the world wars of ancient history, but on a still larger scale; whole populations up in arms and charging headlong to their deaths.

Flying machines like stub-winged boats dumped incendiaries onto forests that were already ablaze, choking the sky with smoke. Dyn stalked between bunkers and warrens, using flamethrowers to clear them out. He watched as Dyn burst from one, dozens of them, burning. They made it a few paces before the flames totally consumed them.

Mushroom clouds bloomed and the image faded to black, before opening up again to a shadow left on a wall. Cut. A lone, pitiful Dyn scavenged for food in a lifeless waste. Cut. A lifeless litter, born twisted and malformed. Corbin hunched forwards, transfixed by the endless litany of violence.

The view shifted again, and it was clear that much time had passed. The image format seemed clearer, more colourful. If that had been an age of chaos, this was an age of peace. The trenches were replaced by irrigation ditches, the planet’s surface divided up into a patchwork of grey fields. Walled settlements with high central towers like motte and bailey castles loomed over the farms. It looked calm and orderly. But the nightmare wasn’t over. The view changed again and Corbin found himself gazing into hell.

A seething mass of hunched-over, pale, four-limbed creatures were crammed densely into a pen. Corbin realised they must be young Dyn. Some were holding crude tools or dressed in harnesses, while others were naked. Taller Dyn moved through the seething mass; marching regularly like robots. They were killing them as they fled, impaling them with long spears. Other Dyn collected the bodies, heaping them high on huge vehicles that trundled behind. The murder was randomised and passionless.

More time passed, and the video format changed again. A camera was being pulled through a warren of narrow tunnels into a big womb-like structure. This was clearly a freefall environment. Dyn swarmed over the walls and through the tunnels; mostly small and immature. They tumbled over each other, seemingly adept in the null gee environment. Larger Dyn, masked and suited, emerged from one tunnel and began spraying the chamber with choking white gas. The tiny young thrashed and died. The process took several minutes, and the camera lingered on every detail. Their physiology might have been alien, their expressions unreadable, but the terrible pain inflicted upon them came through with dreadful clarity.

That was just the start; Corbin saw other worlds around other stars and all were the same. There were ships, too; collections of nozzles, radiators and fuel cylinders that resembled delicate flowers coated in foil. They dispersed from asteroid stations to colonise new worlds, spreading Dynic suffering across the universe. The Broadcast continued in a broadly similar fashion for thousands of years and ended about half an hour later. The new Ambassador had not moved for the duration of the video.

Corbin sat staring as the images played on a loop, vaguely aware of the projector ticking away off to his right. It was only when he dragged his eyes away from the screen and they continued to play that he realised it was blank. He closed his eyes and pressed his forehead lightly. Somewhere far away, Koslov was speaking.

‘Do you understand now, Corbin? Do you see why we kept this from Vash? His bleeding-heart sympathies, the understanding he showed them; none of it could be maintained if he knew their true nature. The Dyn are evil, pure and simple. It’s a miracle they didn’t just wipe us out, when they can inflict that on their own without flinching.’

Corbin wasn’t listening, his mind elsewhere. He had long since realised that his last conversation with Vash held the key to making sense of all of this - to think at the time he had almost dismissed it out of hand as empty speculation! Now the significance of Vash’s words was finally apparent.

The logic of it all unfolded within Corbin’s mind in perfect, crystalline clarity, like his dream of seeing the sunrise a hundred miles above the Earth’s surface, its rays untrammeled by atmosphere. He was struck dumb by the revelation. A short, inexplicable laugh escaped him.

‘Corbin?’ Koslov looked at him searchingly. ‘I know it can be shocking -’ he began to say. Corbin stood with a sharp motion. He looked at the ceiling, trying to order his thoughts, then rounded on Koslov.

‘You just don’t see it, do you? The whole Council, all of you so blinded by your own fear that you don’t even realise what this is. You’ve taken the most crucial insight we have on the Dyn and reduced it to some petty initiation ceremony!’ Corbin laughed again, despairingly. Koslov looked momentarily taken aback, but he quickly recovered.

‘Enlighten me,’ he growled.

‘You really think this is about the Dyn being evil?’

‘What else is there to learn, it not the murderous nature of those above?’

‘This was relayed by the vessel that made first contact, right? But it’s clearly Dynic in origin.’

Koslov nodded slowly.

‘The Dyn willingly broadcast this,’ Corbin said, jabbing an arm towards the screen. ‘They must have compiled it from thousands of years of recorded video, a vast monument to the progress they’ve made. I think that whoever sent that saw it as propaganda, or maybe a kind of survey - ‘this is how we live’.  They wanted to give humanity a measure of who they were.’

‘We have their measure. Certainly this was propaganda. It was intended to cower us into submission.’

‘Clearly it has cowed the Security Council, but that was not its intent. If it had been the Arco Department of Communications would be broadcasting this on a loop. Instead the Dyn have done everything in their power to hide their true nature ever since, including ordering Arco to destroy every copy of this film - that means they didn’t anticipate our initial reaction.’

‘Maybe you’re right,’ conceded Koslov. ‘But what does it matter? We watched the same film Corbin. They’re compassionless and depraved. They kill each other just as they killed us’

‘Watch the opening footage from the broadcast again and tell me you don’t sense compassion in the lingering shots of the mother and her stillborn children, in the way the camera follows the lone Dyn scavenging for food. Tell me you don’t sense the horror in their documenting of war.’

‘The Broadcast doesn’t end there. I saw no such compassion thereafter,’ Koslov countered.

‘If they were truly compassionless they would have wiped us all out instead of merely subduing us. In fact, they’d never have even got this far. They’d have fought themselves to extinction. This is much more basic. This is biological. This is the only way they can live. Those giant swarms of immature Dyn didn’t come from nowhere. They must spawn vast numbers of offspring, like… I don’t know, like fish or frogs. We’ll need to bring in scientists, people who understand these things better than I do…’ Corbin trailed off, then started again.

‘I’m no expert - I barely understood half of what I saw - but this must be the way their world operates. A handful of Dyn, like our very own Liar to Animals, exert some kind of control over their descendents; the older, more mature ones. They become perfect slaves, sterile robots; perhaps they lose consciousness altogether, dying inside right there and then. Perhaps nearly every Dyn dies when they reach adulthood. You and I both saw them; they’re like zombies.’

He spun on the balls of his feet as he turned, pacing manically up and down the room.

‘And they don’t want to go; of course. Evolution takes care of anyone who wants to die. But the very youngest are always too numerous and impossible to govern; each one of them is a potential threat. A population explosion just waiting to happen. So they’re culled - by gas and blades and bullets. They’re intelligent and independent; they protest, they flee, they struggle but it doesn’t matter, they die all the same. Billions upon billions of them. By the look of their Broadcast, this has been going on for so long that the Dyn have evolved whole new classes of emotion to handle it. A species where peace is synonymous with killing and prosperity requires slavery. Where good is bad, and bad is good. They don’t think like us; that’s what we try to remind ourselves. But they also don’t feel like us.’

‘We all have our own theories. But again, what does it matter?’ asked Koslov. ‘So the Dyn do what they do because of their biology, forced to constantly choose between war or infanticide. What crucial insight am I missing here? You almost sound glad to have seen the Broadcast… ’

‘Of course I’m glad,’ Corbin said, as if it were the most obvious thing in the world. ‘This is still happening; this has always been happening. The killing would have continued even if we didn’t know about it. But now we have a chance, and now we know why they had to invade Earth.’

‘Yes,’ said Koslov impatiently. ‘I think the forced climate alterations and the spreading band of settlements around Earth’s equator made that abundantly clear. They conquered and enslaved us just as they once fought each other.’

Corbin shook his head.

‘No, no! He may not have seen the Broadcast, but Vash understood the Dyn better than any of you. Liar to Animals explained it to him - that when we made contact, humanity saw Dynic nature as something that needed righting. The Broadcast makes it abundantly clear why. They may have acted preemptively, but they were acting in self-defence! For the sake of survival, for the sake of truth, justice and the Dynic way, humanity had to be defeated. You said this message arrived a few years after the invasion? Suppose it had reached an Earth that hadn’t been invaded. Just imagine how the old world would have reacted to this.’

Koslov seemed to be thinking it over, but Corbin answered for him.

‘There isn’t any force in the universe that could have prevented the human race of two centuries ago from subjugating the Dyn and doing something, transforming them somehow to prevent the killing. Fixing them. But from the Dyn’s point of view it would be tantamount to extinction. They were confronted by an unfathomable alien species that was utterly committed to the termination of their way of life, of all that they consider good and natural and they only responded by wiping out our warmaking capabilities to ensure we weren’t a threat. Would you be so merciful?’

‘You genuinely believe him don’t you?’ Koslov asked, stunned. The Director-General, arguably the most powerful man alive, was utterly thrown. ‘You believe Vash is doing the right thing. First him, now you - the entire Ambassadorial department, rotten from the top down. Corrupted by a revolutionary’s lies and the whispered half-truths of a Dyn. You said to wait and see, but you’re just playing for time… ’

‘Don’t you care?’ Corbin exploded, grabbing his glass and throwing it at the projector, smashing the lens and plunging them both into gloom. ‘The human imagination isn’t scalable, but try anyway! Just try to imagine what is going on right now, everywhere the Dyn have spread! Imagine the death toll of a hundred Dyn invasions every single year, or a thousand! I can’t even put an order of magnitude estimate on the deaths the Dyn inflict on themselves. Once the occupation is over, that’s when the real work begins.’

‘I can’t let whatever this crazed plan is go ahead. You’ll kill us all.’ Koslov’s tone suggested he had decided Corbin was a madman.

‘The Dyn attacked out of fear. The Security Council is motivated by fear, this whole world lives in fear. Enough! The plan should be blindingly obvious. Once the Dyn are gone, we’re going to do the one thing they fear the most. The right thing. We haven’t got any choice.’

‘But you said it yourself. For the Dyn it would be tantamount to extinction -’

‘So? They didn’t choose this. The scale of their suffering, it’s inconceivable; that’s reason enough to put an end to it! It can’t possibly be true, can it? Perhaps it is; of all the people who saw the Broadcast, I’m the only one who understood.’

Corbin took a deep breath, straightened his uniform and turned to leave, pausing a moment before unlocking the door.

‘If I’m the only good man left in Arco, it falls to me.’

Chapter 18: Abyssal

He breathed in. The air felt a little less thick in his lungs, the jungle greener than it had been in years. A few birds still sang. Maybe this was just a rose-tinted memory, maybe it was real.

Jan sat on the stump of a felled tree, cleaning his dotbow. Occasionally he would glance up to check Eva hadn’t strayed too far. He watched her for a while, wading in the stream, lost in her investigations. Smiling, he returned to his task.

Her life hadn’t afforded her many chances to play so freely. Patrols from the settlement covered this ground regularly, removing any of the more virulent outbreaks of false life. They had erected a palisade around the central group of huts, and dammed the stream upriver to provide a reliable supply of power. It was a vast improvement on some places they had stayed over the years.

Eva came bounding up to him, still at the age where, given the choice, one tends to run everywhere. She was holding what appeared to be a fat, transparent piece of glass. Perhaps it was something old, washed out of the refuse pits upstream. Some kind of lens? He put the dotbow aside.

Eva held up the disk awkwardly with one hand, pushing wet hair away from her face with the other. It was about the size of a watermelon, and up close appeared more like rubber than glass.

‘It came off the false plant,’ she said, pointing to a stem, lying collapsed in the stream. ‘It’s like the glass in your binoculars. So that it can suck in more of the light to eat.’

‘I think you’re right,’ Jan smiled, shaking his head. She amazed him every day.

‘But it doesn’t work very well,’ she admonished.

‘Oh?’

‘No ‘cos it’s from the Dyn’s home and not from our world. But I haven’t seen this kind before. And look!’ Eva exclaimed, grabbing the organic lens and pulling it apart; it deformed like wet paper and split along its midline. ‘It’s squishy!’

She giggled as he made a show of avoiding her hands as she reached to wipe them on him, batting them away ineffectually.

‘Have you made a record of it in your book?’

‘Not yet, but I will later after I’ve done my investigations.’

‘Okay. Why don’t you see if you can find another one?’ Jan suggested.

‘No. They’re all the same,’ she said, face screwing up for a moment. ‘All the false plants are copies of each other.’

‘But they don’t all look the same.’

‘No but they’re still copies. Miss Adisa says it because they don’t have flowers or pollen. So they don’t mix like real plants do.’

‘I think that she’s right,’ he said eventually. Eva would get upset if he didn’t try to keep up.

‘She is. But I don’t know why,’ she said, looking down at her feet as if embarrassed, ‘The plants can’t be exactly the same, not all the time. If the plants never ever changed, then how would they have gotten like how they are now?’

‘Suppose they were always like this?’

‘It doesn’t work like that,’ she said, shaking her head. ‘The plants weren’t always like this, so something made them change, so they’re still changing.’

‘Hmmm...  Maybe you should ask your teacher?’

‘I really like Miss Adisa, she’s so clever and pretty. Can we stay here dad?’ Eva pleaded. Jan felt a pit in his stomach.

‘I hope so,’ he said simply, praying she didn’t push the issue.

‘I’m going to keep looking,’ Eva announced.

‘Go ahead. I’ll be right here,’ Jan said absently, picking up the dotbow again.

As Eva skipped back to the stream, Jan glanced past her and up to the opposite bank, at the rows of pale, translucent stems. She was right, now that he really considered the question. The false plants didn’t pollinate or breed the way earthly crops did. They just spread, a constant creeping tide. A feature of his world no more remarkable than sunrise or the afternoon rains; he’d never thought to question it.

Eva’s investigations soon changed tack, and she spent the next hour rooting around in the stream, trying to catch the tiny Dynic ‘fish’ that occasionally darted past her. Then they went for a swim together.

They returned to the settlement in the late afternoon, Jan carrying an exhausted Eva on his shoulders.

It was good here. Eva was settled, happier than he remembered her being in a long time. There was a local school and Jan had found steady work so far, repairing damaged motorcycle engines and generators. But how long would it last? How long did it ever last, before this settlement was registered? How long before they were driven out?

Much later, Jan was woken by the sound of stifled sobbing. He rolled off the sleeping mat and reached for an acetylene lamp, igniting it and bathing their camp in flickering orange light. It was a sweltering night, so they’d brought their mats outside.

A few other huts and tents were visible against the black silhouette of the palisade wall, and above the wall and the treeline beyond the night sky was strung with stars. The Other Moon was high in the cloudless sky, tracking across the Milky Way like a ship traversing some great river.

Eva was curled up on her own mat, her small form shuddering. Jan moved quickly and sat beside her, placing a reassuring hand on her shoulder.

‘Eva what’s wrong? ’ She turned away from him miserably.

He scooped her up in his arms, holding her close. Inconsolable, her body convulsed as she sobbed, tears rolling down her cheeks.

‘I’m sorry dad.’

‘You’ve nothing to be sorry about. What’s the matter?’ he asked.

‘It’s the Shadows,’ she whispered, between sobs. ‘They’re out there, in the sky.’

The Shadows, Eva’s term for her night terrors, as far as he’d ever discerned. She’d suffered from them for as long as he could remember. He was immediately on edge. Instinctively he cast his eyes around. This wasn’t a bad one, but they’d been kicked out by spooked locals enough times before.

‘The ships?’ Jan glanced up for a moment, noticing a couple of faint sparks; Dynic drives.

‘Not the ships.’

‘Don’t be frightened,’ Jan smiled stiffly. ‘None of it can hurt you.’

‘The Dyn can hurt us,’ Eva snapped, writhing away from him. ‘They could kill us all right now, if they wanted to.’

Jan winced at that word. He wondered what he ought to say; he’d always done his best to never lie or conceal things from Eva. She could always tell when he was lying. Some childhood fears were irrational, but not all.

‘If the Dyn come, or Arco, or anyone else, I’ll protect you,’ he said, reaching across and squeezing her hand.

‘Not from them. The Shadows. They get you in your dreams. They’re out there, hiding in the spaces inbetween. Waiting for us.’ Jan cupped her anguished face in his hands.

‘Eva, look at me,’ he said desperately. ‘I promise that I’ll protect you.’

The dream ended as it always did, in fire and noise. Jan staggered, injured and dazed from the blow the Arco troopers had struck.

‘Eva!’ he cried, over and over, his voice hoarse. In the distance, a big twin-rotor transport helicopter lifted away from a forest clearing, beating clear of the smoke. Despairing, he fell to his knees, the world collapsing in on him.

‘Jan.’

Jan awoke with a jolt, a firm hand resting on his shoulder. Instinctively he pushed it away, frantically rummaging for the photo. Panic rose in him as his hands searched for the glossy, crumpled paper, to no avail.

‘Jan,’ Vash insisted.

As the disorientation of sleep cleared he remembered and a renewed sense of loss settled over him. The photo was gone; torn to shreds by Tuva and lost on the beach along with everything else. He couldn’t say he blamed her, though - she’d been right about him.

‘Jan… Christo’s dead.’

The words snapped him from his reverie. He hadn’t meant to sleep. The last thing Jan remembered was collapsing into his seat, exhausted after the concussion he’d suffered and the exertion of the day. The crawler felt like a lifetime ago.

‘I’m sorry. I know you were close.’

‘I barely knew him,’ Jan replied without thinking. The words echoed bitterly - he hadn’t meant it like that.

He stood, stretched aching muscles and shivered. It was cold. The view outside the porthole had shifted imperceptibly from blue-black to just black; the floodlights served only to emphasize that fact, illuminating nothing.

Christo’s body had been laid out, as much as that was possible whilst leaving room to move about the confines of the bathyscaphe. Even so, Jan was forced to step gingerly over his feet, two scuffed boots protruding from beneath a plastic sheet.

Crouching by Christo’s side, Jan folded back the pall. In life, Christo had radiated passionate intensity, charisma, self-assurance. Now all Jan could think was how young the man looked. Had their positions been reversed, he had no doubt Christo would have said something meaningful and bittersweet, but the words eluded him.

‘I hope he died dreaming of his beautiful future,’ Jan said to no one in particular. Vash smiled sadly.

Jan recognised this face from the graffiti sprayed on the walls of the settlements he passed through, the same tired exhortations to ‘string up the puppet’ stencilled beneath. Yet Vash didn’t read like a traitor - Jan had had enough contact with the venal and the nakedly self-interested to know the signs.  There was no sign of haughty superiority in those grey eyes, nor the sneering contempt that radiated from the vast screens that adorned the Conurbations, delivering the diktats and veiled threats of those above.

‘You dreamt of your daughter?’ Vash asked.

For a moment Jan bristled, but the quiet compassion in Vash’s voice took it out of him. He nodded.

‘How did you know?’

‘When you spoke of her, you spoke in the past tense.’

‘I shouldn’t have. She’s gone but I don’t know that she’s… gone. I convinced myself that she was but then… ’ Jan trailed off - he’d said too much. Not that Aurelie didn’t already have him sussed. ‘Do you have children, a family?’

‘I did,’ Vash replied, a gentle smile playing on his lips. ‘But that was a long time ago.’

Jan gestured towards where the Dyn lay, still dormant, just waiting out the ride.

‘You still haven’t killed it,’ he prompted, cautiously.

‘Have you seen a Dyn die, Jan?’ Vash asked. Jan nodded, thinking back to the pitchfork.

‘There is a lot of violent thrashing.’

‘Then you’ll agree it’s probably best not to risk it in such a confined space. Besides,’ Vash added almost as an afterthought, ‘there are questions I need answers to. Maybe the Dyn can help.’

He was interrupted by a sound like a gunshot that reverberated through the hull. Everyone but Aurelie cringed, furtively scanning the metal walls of their submarine prison.

‘How long has that been going on for?’ Jan asked, unnerved. Pao and Tuva glanced over.

‘About an hour or so. Turns out the hull was damaged after all,’ Pao shrugged.

‘I’m amazed you slept through it,’ said Tuva.

The hull boomed again, twice in quick succession this time.

‘Jan, sit down and strap in,’ ordered Aurelie. He didn’t need to be told twice.

‘How worried should we be?’

‘Don’t worry. Won’t help,’ said Pao. ‘If the hull gives out, there’s nothing we can do.’

‘Is that supposed to be reassuring?’

‘It’s a fact. If there’s a breach when we’re at this depth, well…’ Pao mimed his fist smacking into his palm and made a squelching noise.

Tuva rolled her eyes, but the feigned nonchalance was unconvincing.

‘Where’s our rescue, Aurelie? You seem to have this all figured out, when’s it getting here?’ she asked. Aurelie ignored her.

‘The Warseed will be keeping a low profile - if it acts too fast it risks alerting the Dyn,’ explained Vash.

‘Yeah and if it doesn’t hurry up then the only question is whether it finds us suffocated or crushed by the time it gets here,’ retorted Tuva, her feet drumming a nervous tattoo.

‘Tuva!’ snapped Pao, exasperated. ‘We get it, you’re anxious, but can you stop fidgeting and shut up? You’re driving me crazy.’

Jan looked around the confines of the capsule, searching for something to focus his attention on. Anything to distract him from their predicament and Christo’s lifeless form. It was futile - he’d scanned every inch a hundred times by now.

And then he noticed a new, unwelcome detail; a tiny hairline fracture in the glass of the porthole.

‘Aurelie...’ Jan cautioned, his voice plaintive. What had he been planning to say? What would they do; patch it up, against half an ocean’s pressure?

One by one the others noticed, falling silent and still as though they were somehow responsible, their quarrels immediately cast aside. Even the Dyn stirred at last, locking a wary eye on the glass.

The hull shuddered and the weight distribution of the bathyscaphe shifted dramatically, as one of the external tanks tore away from the hull and drifted upwards. The depth gauge started to click faster as their descent speed increased. The bangs grew in frequency, getting louder and more urgent, like the oppressive blackness beyond was trying to break its way in. Like Eva’s Shadows had finally come for him, as well.

Pao spoke up, his voice flat.

‘If we lose another couple of tanks we’re not going to be able to make the ascent. We need to drop the ballast now, we’re already dropping too fast.’ Warily, he stood.

‘Sit back down,’ Aurelie warned.

‘Aurelie, this is crazy,’ hissed Pao. ‘We can’t push this thing any further. We gave it our best shot. It’s over.’ He took a step forward.

‘I said sit down!’

Pao made to lunge for the controls but was thrown back. Without warning the floor dropped out beneath them and the sub tilted through forty-five degrees, his cries drowned out by an agonised rending.

The internal lights flickered and went out, leaving only the glow of the floods leaking through the porthole, Aurelie silhouetted against it.

‘We will complete the mission,’ she insisted as Pao steadied himself. ‘Do not get in the way of that.’

Defeated, Pao bowed his head miserably as the hull groaned again, sending reverberations through the walls.

Another boom, another tank breached or torn free. Slowly the bathyscaphe began to spin. Jan found it hard to focus.

‘Fuckfuckfuckfuckfuck…’ cursed Tuva over and over, rocking back and forth. Vash had closed his eyes, and though his expression betrayed nothing he held the straps in a death grip. Even the Dyn’s alien physiology screamed tension.

Aurelie stared straight ahead, seemingly transfixed by the void beyond the glass. Was she reflecting on her life? Was she scared? Was she praying?

The crack was spreading. Jan screwed his eyes tight, trying frantically to relive every happy memory he had, to hold the image of Eva in his head. Each time some new, tortured cry emanated from their metal coffin he’d instinctively open his eyes and his concentration would break.

He saw something through the porthole. A glint in the darkness. Had he imagined it? The erratic rotation of the bathyscaphe brought the object into view again. There was definitely something out there. In an instant it went from little more than a suggestion of movement at the very limits of perception, visible only by how the light caught the bubble it was encased in, to a dark, vaguely oblate form, hurtling at them out of the bathyal gloom.

He made to cry out in warning, bracing himself, but it was already upon them, engulfing the bathyscaphe in a material that flowed like mercury.

The impact was softer than it should have been, though still enough to knock them back. Jan exhaled in astonishment, too stunned to speak. They were alive!

He saw Aurelie, vindicated at last, slacken with relief.

The tortured shuddering and groaning of the stressed hull ceased and the engine stopped. Even the air appeared to be thawing, and the lights switched back on as if they had passed into some new realm, no longer crushed beneath the abyss.

Pao was the first to break the dazed silence.

‘Aurelie... you were right,’ he laughed incredulously, rubbing the back of his neck. ‘But what on earth was that?’

‘The cavalry,’ Aurelie smiled, turning at last to face them, as they broke out into elated cheers. ‘We’re not alone. We’re not alone…’

‘And those bastards in orbit aren’t going to know what hit them.’

Interlude: What Strange Skies

They reached the valley as dusk settled, the car winding along a road that was little more than a dirt track. Their destination had no official designation, only a local name, and if the driver knew it he wasn’t sharing. He hadn’t said a single word to Vash since they had left the conurbation, the language barrier between them reinforced by a deep mistrust.

The town appeared almost untouched by time, as though the mountainous valley in which it nestled had shielded it. The dun-coloured mudbrick walls of the settlement seemed like an emergent, natural feature of the surrounding landscape and from a distance only the electric lights marked it as belonging to the modern world.

Vash took solace in the fact that places like this persisted even now. He could almost imagine that here - and if not here, at least somewhere - people might live in blissful ignorance of the wearying world and the tides of change that had swept across it in his lifetime.

But that probably hadn’t been true in centuries and, as he sharply reminded himself, ignorance isn't bliss. It’s just ignorance.

What does Iskandar have for me? Why make contact after all this time?

‘Look,’ said the driver at last, gesturing through the windscreen at the road ahead. ‘Arco.’

Vash craned forwards to see. A reflective barrier glinted in the glare of their headlights and as they drew closer an armoured vehicle switched on its own, flooding the cabin with light. Vash squinted, fumbling preemptively for his papers.

They pulled to a stop as the soldiers approached. Vash wound down the passenger window and wordlessly handed his documentation to the man outside, hoping nobody would question what he was doing on the edge of a warzone, half a world away from the seat of his authority. He needn’t have worried. After a perfunctory scan of the papers, the soldiers waved them through. A bribe would have worked just as well.

As they reached the town, any lingering sense of serenity dissipated. Arco Enforcers were systematically moving from one tenement to the next, pulling families from their homes and herding them towards the town centre. A loudhailer blared instructions and good tidings in the native language. Vash didn’t need to understand the words to know. These people were to be registered as citizens.

The car nosed its way through the thickening press of humanity, until the streets grew too crowded.

‘You, out now,’ announced the driver.

‘Where am I going?’ The driver shrugged. Vash shook his head. ‘You’ll wait here?’

A slight incline of the head, a slow blink. Did he mean to say that he would?

Vash clambered out of the car, drawing his overcoat around him. Without knowing what else to do he began to instinctively follow the crowd, doing his best not to draw attention to himself. People ignored him, more concerned with their loved ones. There were more than enough strangers in town already. The bright vehicle lights skittered off the dun walls, illuminating dust motes and sending shadows flickering over the crowd.

On the opposite side of the street an armoured personnel carrier slid by, an Enforcer seated in the turret, one hand resting on a mounted machine gun. Up ahead a fight broke out and a trio of soldiers rushed over to break it up, indiscriminately striking at participants and bystanders alike.

Please, don’t let there be trouble, Vash silently beseeched the crowd. Just do as they say and it’ll all be over soon.

The fact was of scant comfort. Vash knew what came next. He could look at the young father walking beside him, his son sitting on his shoulders, and see his whole life play out in fast-forward.

After registration came relocation. In a month or two, kind, well-meaning men and women would arrive in buses. They would explain to the man that conditions in the village were unsanitary, unsafe, that many of the buildings didn’t have electricity or plumbing.

‘And if you just sign on this dotted line here - ignore the Enforcer, he’s just here for my protection - you’ll be taken to a conurbation and provided with modern housing, basic income, healthcare and education. A chance to escape poverty,’ they would promise.

The man would ask if his family would come with him.

‘Of course! We’d never break up a family. Unfortunately, we can’t guarantee all of your community will be placed in the same area,’ they’d say apologetically. ‘But then we wouldn’t want the formation of ghettos, would we? Your children will be taught the new language and you’ll pick it up quickly enough - so you’ll soon feel right at home.’

Reluctantly he would sign his name, knowing that he had little choice. He wasn’t some wastelander fanatic. Could it really be all that bad? And with that the implacable gears of the Arco machine would shudder into motion. Inexorably, every aspect of this man’s identity would be ground down until the apathetic, dependant, isolated husk that remained could be neatly summarised in a series of little boxes and safely filed away.

A pained cry snapped Vash out of his reverie. Two Enforcers were laying into an older man, kicking him where he had fallen.

How did the saying go? Whoever saves a life saves the world. So much for subtlety.

‘Hey!’ he yelled, shouldering his way through the massing crowd of enraged onlookers. The Enforcers continued, oblivious.

‘Hey!’ Vash forced his way to the front of the crowd, shoving his pass in the face of an Enforcer who briefly barred his way.

The Enforcer’s eyes were hidden behind an opaque visor, but he straightened as he caught sight of the glossy, important-looking paper. He motioned hastily for the others to stop.

‘Who’s in command here?’ Vash demanded. The Enforcers exchanged looks.

Where did they find these recruits? He noticed very few of the Enforcers were wearing proper uniforms. And where were the civilians? This operation was probably punitive, carried out by some warlord with the merest figleaf of legitimate authority. It happened all too often, especially in places where insurgencies had smouldered for decades.

‘Who’s in charge of this operation?’ he repeated.

An Enforcer strode through the cordon, his uniform denoting a senior rank.

‘Get him up!’ he snapped. Begrudgingly, the others followed his orders, helping the local to his feet and dusting him off. ‘Have a medic see to him.’

The crowd began to dissipate. The officer turned to Vash.

‘May I see your papers?’ he asked in fluent, if heavily accented English. ‘Just a formality.’

The officer made a show of scrutinising them before handing them back.

‘You’re a long way from home, sir,’ he remarked, innocently. ‘With all due respect, may I inquire if you’re here in an official capacity? Some details about your mandate would clear things up. I wasn’t informed you’d be joining us.’

‘Indeed. But first, I would like to know why there seems to be no record of this operation,’ Vash retorted. A guess, but a safe one. ‘An unauthorised action of this size will be taken very seriously.’

For a moment the Enforcer’s shoulders stiffened. He quickly stifled the reaction, but Vash noticed. That confirmed it.

‘That is certainly concerning, sir. I will seek to correct any errors in documentation immediately. I assure you those responsible will be disciplined. I had no idea we were under inspection.’

‘Spot inspection,’ Vash smiled thinly.

‘That’s highly irregular -’

‘I’m sure it is. Please don’t make me take this up with your superiors. This whole operation is a mess - sort it out.’

‘Yessir.’

Vash stepped past the chastened officer, casting one last meaningful look at the Enforcers before rejoining the dwindling flow of people headed for the central square. Word would spread of his presence, and with any luck good behaviour from the Enforcers would follow in its wake, although he hoped there wouldn’t be any further questioning. He didn’t think they would risk it - it would be far safer to keep their heads down.

Still, he had endangered his mission. A small part of Vash was beginning to wonder if Iskandar would ever make contact, or whether he’d already fled the scene, caught off-guard by the Enforcers. Or was he being set up?

The square was packed. Half of it was a maze of barriers, a line of miserable locals snaking through to a tent on the far side where they’d be chipped and registered. Harsh halogen lights glared down from overhead, turning night to uncomfortable day. He doubted he’d find Iskandar here even if there was anonymity in crowds. There were soldiers everywhere.

As he turned to leave the square, a wiry young man hurrying in the opposite direction barged past him, sending him stumbling. He vanished before Vash could even utter a cry of protest.

Regaining his composure Vash checked his pockets. You could never be too careful - it would be just like the Enforcers to put some pickpocket up to stealing his papers in order to cover their backs. Instead, his hands brushed on something unfamiliar.

A shred of packaging with a simplified map, street name and the words 24 Hour Coffee scrawled on the back.

He found the meeting place without further incident. The café was in a completely nondescript building down one of the side streets, marked out, as promised, by a flickering neon sign advertising round the clock coffee. Inside was a shambles, deserted but for a lone waitress clearing up the mess. Apparently the Enforcers had already been through this way. She nodded wordlessly in the direction of a door leading out the back.

Iskandar was waiting on a tiny concrete-floored verandah, sitting at a low plastic table, head bowed. The coffee house backed out onto a housecube stack, so their meeting spot was walled off on all four sides by high concrete, with only a tiny square of night sky above. An air conditioning unit hummed and a muffled argument filtered down through an open window.

Iskandar didn’t acknowledge Vash as he sat down, barely lifting his eyes from the mug clasped in his hands. The man looked as though he had aged decades since they’d last met. It had been a while, but not that long. He was thin, his papery skin looking as though it was on the edge of flaking away.

‘It’s good to see you again,’ Vash said hesitantly. They hadn’t ended things on the best of terms. The waitress placed another cup of coffee on the table. Vash nodded his thanks, raising it to his lips.

‘I wouldn’t chance it, if I were you,’ said Iskandar, raising his head very slowly, as if it might snap off. ‘Unless you like the taste of soluble cadmium.’

‘They’re poisoning you?’

‘Past tense. The damage is already done - so in fact the coffee’s probably fine.’

A complicated expression crossed Vash’s face. He noticed his old friend's hand was shaking ever so slightly.

‘I’m so sorry.’

‘Don’t be. I’ve played my part. I see you’re still receiving regular ichor infusions,’ remarked Iskandar, a bitter edge to his voice. ‘You can’t have aged a day since I last saw you, and you were old even then.’

‘I’d hoped not to outlive you.’

‘Vash, you're a walking anthropic principle. Always the last man standing, always carrying on. Tough luck - you’ll have to remember for the both of us. I don’t envy you that.’

‘If there is anything I can do…’ Vash trailed off as Iskandar waved the remark away.

‘Forget about it. The Dyn will have their revenge on me one way or another, though I would have  preferred a bullet. They’ll chop down any stalk that grows too tall because they don’t have the nerve to pull us out by the root.’

‘You must understand that by their standards, that is mercy,’ said Vash. ‘They could have wiped us out on a whim, and yet they haven’t. I still believe they want to understand us, to find a compromise.’

‘I have no use for Dynic mercy or compromise.’ Iskandar slammed the table, then winced. ‘They left us alive and that was their mistake. For as long as they are unable to break the human spirit, their downfall is inevitable. My only regret is that I will not live to see it happen.’

‘You still believe that?’

‘It’s not a question of belief,’ insisted Iskandar, his words escaping in a sharp staccato. ‘You know that as well as I do. This world is a tinderbox. All we need is the spark that will set it aflame.’

‘The Broadcast?’ asked Vash sceptically.

‘ I didn’t bring you here to rehash old arguments for the sake of posterity. I am tired and my time is running out. But yes, the Dyn Broadcast.’

Iskandar fumbled something from his pocket. He cursed as it slipped from his grasp, falling to the ground with a clatter.

‘I’ll get it,’ said Vash, bending down to retrieve the object. It was a pocket terminal - one that looked like it had come from the first decade after the invasion. That would make it a century old, though it looked almost new. As he placed it on the table the screen lit up, displaying tightly packed mathematics and annotations.

‘We are being played, Vash.’

‘I know that -’

‘Not the Dyn. I don’t know how or by whom, but both us and the Dyn have been set up.’

There was a long pause.

‘I don’t follow.’

‘The Dyn developed far slower than us, but they are still, by my reckoning, not much more than a few hundred thousand years older than our own civilisation. Certainly not more than a million.’

Vash nodded, and Iskandar raised his palms up to the sky. Even through the bright light of the porch he could spot a couple of stars through the opening.

‘What strange skies we find ourselves beneath…’ mused Iskandar, his eyes unfocussed for a moment.

He pushed the terminal towards Vash. He vaguely recognised the calculations; the Bayesian form of the Drake Equation, the results before and after first contact with the Dyn. Vash looked askance at Iskandar.

‘Imagine our situation before first contact; an empty universe seemed all but certain. A universe full of life, ruled out by the empty sky we saw. How could everything be this finely balanced?’ Iskandar patted the air vaguely. ‘Why a near-empty universe?’

‘There is a saying that zero, one and infinity are the only numbers that need no explanation.’

‘You see, of course. That's why, despite our former differences, I had to bring this to you - who else would listen to my words and consider they might be true? Who else would realise the implications? The others are too preoccupied with squabbling in the dirt to look up at the sky. They aren't like us.’

‘They are us,’ said Vash. Iskandar ignored him.

‘We don’t know where the Dyn came from. But that’s beside the point. Where is everyone else? Why no multi-million or billion-year old civilisations? Why only the two of us, evenly matched, as if we’re two fighters dropped into a boxing ring? The gap between the birth of our civilisation and theirs… on cosmological time scales it’s nothing. We’re almost twins.’

‘Perhaps that’s simply the way the universe works. There is more to physics than we understand. The Other Moon is evidence of that; there is no imaginable technology that could account for it. With craft like that, who knows how far the Dyn might have come?’

Iskandar shook his head. ‘You’re right on one count. There is far more to our reality than this… thin surface. Something has scoured the galaxy and maybe the universe of intelligent life, all except us two. Hell, maybe this agent has wiped clean even more than that.’

‘What?’

Iskandar barked out a humourless laugh.

‘Aha! So you can be shocked. Perhaps even your open mind has its limits.’

Iskandar grabbed the terminal out of Vash’s hand, twisting it round and flicking through the stored data.

‘The Dyn broadcast; It showed their home.’

A statement that might have been extraordinary, passed off as utterly normal. Iskandar leant forward, casting the top of his face into shadow. Vash realised how thin he looked, with papery skin on the edge of flaking away.

‘Have you seen it?’

‘Not all of it. My father was the one who relayed it; he gave his life so that we might know our enemy. My mother told me the story in the resettlement camp they set up beneath one of the old orbital fountains. She died shortly after we arrived, killed by a rock they flung at us for no reason at all. We dealt with it well. I had my work, and you… you always tried to carry the whole world on your shoulders, as if that somehow made it all easier. It was all so calm in those days, that was what was strange in hindsight. The people we used to be didn’t break under the horror, just got on with their diminished lives…’

Iskandar trailed off and blinked heavily.

Vash waited politely.

‘I knew what she’d told me was important and I never forgot. I was on one of the last ferries back from Luna. That was when we received a massive data dump, relayed from the ship that made first contact with the Dyn, copied so many times that even they couldn’t destroy every receiver right away. I saw it on a display when I was a child. I made copies.’

‘That’s why they’re killing you?’

Iskandar nodded.

‘Your people will have been given an order they could not refuse. And yes, before you interrupt, I am putting your life in danger by telling you this. Why do you think we’re meeting here?’

‘But you judged it was worth the risk.’

Iskandar slapped the terminal back down on the table. It displayed a blurry photograph of a screen, looping through a black starfield and false colour images.

‘I’ve spent years deciphering what I saw that day; it was sheer luck, something I felt compelled to exploit for all it was worth. I’ve taken my time, developed my theories. I’ve learned all that I could of physics and astronomy. This much I have discovered: The Dyn broadcast, the part that I saw, contained an image of the night sky as seen from their homeworld in various wavelengths.’

The waitress returned, looking vaguely affronted that neither of them had touched their drinks. She caught a glance of the terminal on the table, and then made eye contact with Vash. After seeing the bronze delta of Arco administration she turned sharply away, hurrying back inside. Iskandar continued.

‘I think they considered it artistic- nothing more. They don’t care much for pure science. There were labels applied by the ship that relayed the image, the one that made first contact. One of the images was a microwave sky scan.’

The terminal screen displayed a low-resolution full sky view, false colour coded according to temperature. He thought of the distances these images had travelled to reach the surface of a trapped Earth. There was no point trying to encompass it in imagination.

‘I finally understood what I was seeing a few months ago,’ Iskandar widened the image, showing blurry red and blue blotches in a familiar mottled pattern. Vash wracked his brains, trying to remember what he could of astronomy and physics.

‘That is the cosmic microwave background, yes?’

Iskandar scoffed.

‘No, not quite. Not ours.’

Not ours - the words echoed in his mind. Iskandar flicked a second image onto the screen, a second pattern of mottled red and blue, a human image. There were subtle differences, so subtle he didn’t notice them at first.

Vash’s eyes widened.

‘How far did the Dyn travel?’

‘Ha! Now you’re getting it, at last. I have no words for how far, because I do not know. If they can stride between galaxies as you or I step over boulders in a stream, then think what that implies. Faster than light travel, at the very least. Miracles in the hands of inferior minds - the Other Moon. And still, nobody else has come knocking! The skies are empty - almost, but not quite.’

‘You’ve no evidence of that. You have one anomalous observation, that’s all.’

‘The shadows are lengthening. Can’t you feel it? The universe is a cold place, and if the Dyn are the first aliens we’ve encountered, what does that imply, statistically? Are the others all like them, or worse?’

It was hard to listen to, and not just because Vash had to strain to make sense of Iskandar’s words. Everything he said was coloured by fear, but in a certain way it was undeniably reasonable.

‘I will have to think about what you’ve told me.’

‘I have the first pieces of the puzzle, but I do not have much time. You must complete it,’ insisted Iskandar. He fumbled the terminal into Vash’s hands, clasping them.

‘I can’t take this,’ cautioned Vash, pushing it away from him. ‘You’re handing me a death sentence.’

‘I’ve already received mine. Take it.’

Vash left shortly afterwards, rejoining the waiting car and departing the settlement. He imagined vengeful, fearful Dyn staring at him down their scopes. The shanty mixture of improvised huts and housecube stacks gave way to open algae fields, then to a spartan airfield where an Arco-issue short-range aeroshuttle awaited.

Vash boarded the transport in a daze, barely acknowledging the salutes of the pilot and guard. They climbed quickly, circling away from the nameless settlement, no questions asked. The quiet hum of the compressor jets was almost peaceful. Vash leant back in the small passenger seat and stared out of the window at the dark stratospheric sky. He looked up at the stars, piercingly bright and remote, but only for a moment before he returned his gaze to the papers in front of him.

Chapter 19: Consequentialism

Metal Guru is it you, Metal Guru is it you

Sitting there in your armour plated chair, oh yeah

Metal Guru is it true, Metal Guru is it true

All alone without a telephone, oh yeah

T. Rex, ‘Metal Guru’

Cocooned within a living machine, they’d waited for something new to happen. Hours passed; hours of near-silent travel while the hull slowly de-stressed and their barely suppressed, anxious anticipation built.

There was nothing to do but wait; the bathyscaphe’s own controls were worse than useless with the hull encased in silvery caulk. Smart matter projecting a supercavitating envelope, Aurelie suggested.

From what they gleaned from those instruments that still functioned, they were able to guess at their heading, and speculation inevitably turned to what they might find when they arrived. Again everyone looked askance at Aurelie - she’d been proven right thus far - but this time she could only shrug.

Trying to predict what might await them after all these years was futile. You could not apprehend all the options available to a being more intelligent than you were. Vash did not know what was meant to happen next, and that brought excitement as well as fear.

There was no announcement of their arrival. Vash didn’t even feel the deceleration. A sense of unreality settled over everything as the fluid machine engulfing the hull seeped away, light glancing in through its thinning tendrils. Pao scrambled for the porthole, hungrily burying his face in the view.

‘I can see stars,’ he whispered, awestruck.

‘We’re here,’ Aurelie murmured. ‘Help me open the hatch.’

‘Is it safe out there?’ asked Jan. Aurelie ignored him, already straining at the door. Jan’s curiosity got the better of him and soon enough he joined her, crowbar in hand, while Pao lunged against the hatch. Little by little, they forced it open.

Vash could hardly believe they had made it this far.

Hardly. Yet some part of Vash had expected this from the beginning, because to a certain kind of intelligence they were as atoms in a gas, individually chaotic but collectively predictable. The Utilitaria had arranged his and Aurelie’s trajectories to bring them here; he had always known this was possible.

The hatch gave way without warning. Fresh air rushed into the stale, musty cabin and for a moment Vash was blinded as it was flooded with light. The light was warm on his skin, almost like sunlight. No, exactly like sunlight.

He blinked. As his eyes adjusted after hours of gloom, Vash was confronted by a vertiginous vista and his mind fell back through time.

The sun dazzled, illuminating the crescent of Earth. Curls of cloud moved over the blue expanse, and as the sunlight caught them, the glittering arcs of satellites, statites and orbital rings were rendered briefly visible, structures soaring through space, falling along a million choreographed trajectories or sustained second by second against gravity.

The false perspective looked down on the Horn of Africa as it once had been, restored grassland and tamed desert strung with metropolises and arcologies. Profusions of titanic, active-matter constructs bloomed in the hearts of the greatest cities, the machinery of mind itself.

And out in the void beyond, sharp points of light flared, too bright to be stars or the primitive spacecraft of the Dyn. Billions of people, living in peace and liberated of need, free to pursue their own personal utopia. Fantastically more thriving at one remove from reality. This was a world perfected, every element controlled and shaped so subtly that you might never notice.

'What am I seeing?' demanded Tuva. 'They’ve opened a hole in the air.'

'It’s not real...' said Jan. 'But I don’t get how… It can’t be a screen. I can feel the sunlight.'

The view twisted to the left, turning away from the Sun and Earth. Stars wheeled across his field of vision, no longer veiled by glare. Vash remembered seeing stars that didn’t twinkle, so long ago. The distance seemed more tangible up here.

There came a voice, speaking as if from the stars themselves.

'You have questions: I will answer. Observe.'

There was an odd sensation, like the momentary lurch felt before sleep, and images sleeted through Vash’s vision. They should have been too fast to apprehend, but he saw every detail - fields interlocking to push on neurons, patterns of activation spreading and unfurling under the influence of fantastically complex external triggers, manipulating his mind like a finely tuned instrument.

The voice was speaking again.

'One hundred billion neurons give ten quadrillion ops per second gives a state space on the order of ten to the ten quadrillion ops, for each second. It is impossible to exhaustively search, but it can be navigated, if different alternatives are planned for. The critical common routes can be analysed. This is true for human history just as the human mind. The result is unified. You are here and you hear me speak. Understand.'

'Who are you?'

'I speak for the Utilitaria. I am their emissary. '

The voice resolved into a figure; standing on nothing, glowing without illuminating. It looked like a man, or suggested the form of a man, it’s skin an iridescent grey-on-black, it’s eyes blank, omnipercipient spheres. Certainty and solidity flowed from it, the answer to every question he could think to ask right there to be known.

Vash glanced back at Aurelie, seeking what - reassurance? She gave an encouraging nod.

‘Why did you bring us here?’

The Emissary flashed a finely calibrated smile.

'I cannot risk your future for my plans. I’ve been waiting for permission to act.'

'That’s it?' asked Jan, finding his voice at last. 'You’ve just been sitting here, waiting for us to tell you what to do?'

The vision flickered, then vanished like a blown soap bubble, followed a moment later by the sky. They were left standing alone in a formless, diffusely lit white room. The crude hull of the bathyscaphe rested incongruously behind them.

For a moment, nobody spoke. Pao collapsed back against the bathyscaphe, exhausted, looking as if he might throw up or pass out. Every human mind has its breaking point, Vash thought.

Jan surprised him by being the first to speak.

'It’s like it blew a fuse.'

'I think,' said Vash, his voice sounding strange in his own ears, 'that might be just what happened. The more people speaking, the more brains it had to stimulate to make us perceive it, the more reactions it had to predict, and it had to predict our interactions with each other - a little like talking to more than one person in a conversation, I suppose. So it had too much to process, and shut down.  I don’t think it was expecting more than a few of us.'

Vash glanced again at Aurelie. It was expecting two of us.

‘You said they were gone,’ said Tuva sceptically, ‘and yet your weapon seems to have developed a personality…’

Jan’s eyes remained fixed on Vash.

‘It was an emissary, an avatar… a persona, it wasn’t -’ Vash began. Jan cut him off.

'You’ve gotta start telling us more than that. You keep coming up with this stuff like it’s obvious. Maybe it’s not coming back, ever. Maybe that was its only message. You’re just guessing.'

'It’s not guesswork. It’s inference, just as my bringing us here was inference. The world that it came from, the world you just saw, that was my world,' said Aurelie.

You really have to find a way of phrasing things not to hit like a hammer blow, Vash thought.

'...Vash’s world. We are both survivors from before the invasion.'

And there it was; the truth laid bare. Jan looked from Vash to Aurelie. Vash wondered how they must appear, like ancient statues?

Tuva blew out her cheeks.

‘Well that explains why you’re both so fucking weird.’

Pao chuckled weakly.

‘Might be the least surprising revelation of today,’ he said, standing back up, colour draining back into his face.

'Where are we? The whole truth,’ Jan insisted.

'We’re in a space the Utilitaria created. It brought us here because we are needed for something. I know that’s vague, but beyond that I honestly don’t know.'

'So now what?' Jan asked.

'Play our role, whatever it is,’ Aurelie said, stepping in. 'We need to get deeper into the installation. Vash, you’re with me. The rest of you, stay with the prisoner. We’ll be back soon.'

Tuva and Pao didn't say anything, but for a moment Jan rose to follow them. A glare from Aurelie held him back.

‘How do you know where to go?’

‘The architecture’s intentional,’ Aurelie called back to him. ‘It will lead us where we need to go.’

Vash took Aurelie’s arm as they crossed the atrium, walking through empty space where the Emissary had stood and stars had glinted. His back felt sore from the hours, maybe a full day, crammed inside the bathyscaphe. He fancied that he could feel the hundreds of atmospheres of pressure trying to implode this place, the absurd forces it had been built to resist - not that the chamber resembled a submarine, despite its smoothly arching form.

The room looked like any other functional Utilitaria-built structure. It was warmly and uniformly lit, the opalescent walls never quite forming sharp angles. Fractal, foaming tessellations extended down to the limit of Vash’s vision, mathematics rendered material.

A blank wall ahead of them rippled as Aurelie approached, then drew back in an organic motion, revealing a long corridor. Vash looked over his shoulder. The bathyscaphe was an artefact from a lesser reality, barely holding itself together. Jan, Pao and Tuva clung close to its bulk, as though they found it reassuring.

Then the wall sealed itself behind them, muffling and then eliminating the background noise. The corridor was the same articulated white foam on all sides, gripping beneath his boots.

They wandered deeper and deeper into a labyrinth of tunnels, the corridors curving this way and that, Aurelie leading the way with a single-minded determination. Of the Emissary there remained no sign and Vash began to wonder if they were lost after all.

'Vash -' said Aurelie. 'I have an idea; we have to reduce its computational burden. Hold on a moment. Don’t talk.'

Aurelie screwed her eyes shut and turned away from Vash. The air flickered. For a moment the figure of the emissary was there, winking into existence like a phantom. The stars wavered around them both, and time stretched.

‘Aurelie?’ Vash asked after a minute’s silence that felt like an eternity. There was no response. Gently, then more firmly, he shook her shoulder. She remained oblivious.

He moved to face her. Her eyes remained closed for a long moment, then opened. She looked straight through him, unseeing.

‘Aurelie?’

She snapped back to full awareness, wild exultation lighting up her eyes, a look Vash had never seen before.

'You understand what this is?' she laughed. 'Everything’s already in place. What it said, what the Emissary said - that’s it! All it needs is permission from us. We never lost.'

'You need to slow down,’ urged Vash, taken aback. ‘Did you speak to it?'

'Yes. I was right. I think closing your eyes makes it easier for it, there’s fewer free variables. Just give it permission to block out your senses. Ask it yourself. It’ll be quicker that way.'

‘Is it safe?’

‘Nothing’s safer. It can’t hurt us, Vash.’

Vash closed his eyes as instructed. Bleached white sand stretched away beneath him, fading into the murky blue-black of the abyss. A huge shape loomed in the distance. He knew without having to be told that this was what he would see if his sight could pass through the walls of the structure and somehow pierce the crushing darkness beyond.

The Emissary emerged from the gloom, unblinking eyes locked on Vash. It strode across the seafloor, feet kicking up plumes of marine snow, until it stood in front of him. It bowed its head.

'Time passes slower here. Ask your questions.'

‘Emissary, should I call you that? Or should I -’

‘The thirty-ninth.’

‘That’s your name?’

‘Call me whatever you wish. It is irrelevant. I am the 39th iteration of the Emissary. Many were initiated, only I survived.’

‘I am sorry for that,’ said Vash. The nameless emissary inclined it’s head.

‘That is the past now. We must protect that which can still be protected.’

‘What did Aurelie mean, that we never lost?'

'I will explain.'

The Emissary sat down, cross-legged. It gestured for Vash to follow, conjuring a low stool for him. It didn’t need the moment to gather its thoughts. It was trying to put him at his ease.

'You never understood how we could lose. That was the clue; if your web of belief mandates impossibility, a belief is false. We were never defeated.'

'Then what happened two centuries ago?'

'We were caught unaware by an event that defied prediction. There was no belief-space allocated to non-physical events. We had no plan, so one was devised - send our warseeds into the deep system, construct spacecraft and return with orders of magnitude more power than the Dyn. Outcome: total victory, but the likely irreversible death of a vast fraction of humanity then alive. We could have rebuilt, restored all sources of value from template, but you - humanity - decided against this option. Another plan was devised. We would appear to surrender by annihilating ourselves as promised. The Dyn would keep their hostages.'

‘How is that a plan? How is that different from abandoning us to fate?’

The mask-like face betrayed nothing.

'You understand precommitment Vash,’ it gently chided. ‘Once we agreed to the Dynic ultimatum, we had to keep to it. Essentially, you were abandoned to fate, but we rested a thumb on the scales.’

‘The Dragon’s Teeth. Was there really no other way?’

‘We had to be subtle. External attack gives the Dyn hours of warning. High-yield nuclear torpedoes could have been launched in three to four days, fired from Luna and near-Earth, overwhelming the Dyn. Outcome: They spot the warheads days ahead, devastate Earth and flee. Understand.'

'I understand,' said Vash.

'Even bombardment by ultra-relativistic missiles fired along all bracketing vectors, if set up over many decades by stealth vehicles in the deep system, had a moderate probability of giving the Dyn several minutes of warning, enough for them to sterilise the surface. The second law is absolute - there is no way to hide energy release in vacuum, no way to sneak close to Dyn ships without a thermal emission. The Other Moon requires less than a minute to translate to Earth. An unacceptable risk. Instead, an internal attack was employed.'

'Hold on, the Other Moon is a ship?'

'I don’t know what it is. What I see is a crudely processed asteroid; all the technology I can infer is consistent with observed Dynic capabilities. But two centuries ago it appeared from nowhere in low Earth orbit.' It gave a wry smile. 'There is clearly more to this reality than even those I speak for understood.'

It said Reality instead of Universe. Surely that didn’t imply -

'Better alternative. A high probability of disabling all Dynic assets within one minute is necessary to save Earth from reprisal. I cannot emit anomalous heat. The Dyn would see and strike. They have convincingly demonstrated their resolve to follow through on threats. They are very effective at precommitment and strategic irrationality - that gives many hints about evolutionary adaptation to social competition on global scales. This became a battle of strategic positioning and manoeuvre, fought with no communication. This is something I am made for. Combine the Dyn’s psychological inertia and inexplicable technology, and it forces me into a narrow range of possible actions. What you see is the best and safest route to victory, saving many lives but at a certain cost: two centuries of diminishment. I am sorry for that. Believe me.'

The worst part was that it meant every word.

'How do we win?'

The Emissary smiled, and waved its hand.

The ocean folded in around them and revealed the warseed’s creation: a spiral of coral-like structures gathered around a tubular core, embedded in the abyss, extending tendrils upwards like an anemone.

The core contained a web of corridors, including the receiving chamber they had arrived in. The view swam upwards but the perspective twisted, and Vash apprehended the rest of the seabed, all at once and with perfect clarity.

He saw an array of structures grown from silicon and carbon and calcium shaped into a strange, half-living forest, rooted to the foundations of the Earth. The entire ocean floor was covered in a network of tens of thousands of them. Each one contained a geothermal sink, and the trickle of megawatts they produced were stored, hoarded over the decades in electron-cell stores, rationed and employed to extrude more matter and reproduce. It was slow, methodical, terrifying. The very substance of the ocean and crust, turned to fabrication over the course of nearly two centuries, growing invisibly beneath the Dyn’s gaze. They had been right to fear.

'What does it do?'

The tendrils sprouted upwards, spilling outwards as they did, suffusing the ocean and rising to the surface. They were cables, Vash thought. Blue light raced along them, surging up towards the surface. The vision ended, and the initial illusion returned; he and the Emissary sitting alone on the abyssal plain.

'There is no metaphor. The optical fibres transmit blue light, each one with a capacity of one hundred kilowatts. Each hub will spool countless fibres to the ocean surface. Each Dynic asset will be targeted. None will survive.'

'You devised all this, alone?'

‘Yes.'

For a while Vash found he had nothing to say. The plan was perfect, except -

'Why do you need us? Why do you need our permission?'

'You already know. I cannot hijack humankind’s destiny and this act will radically alter it in ways even I cannot foresee. I cannot act in aggression, and I cannot decide on your behalf if I cannot predict what you will choose. This is what makes the Utilitaria your ally, not your master. I could terminate the plan if you choose. I do not yet know what you will ask me to do.’

'I find that hard to believe. I've already decided that the occupation cannot be allowed to continue a moment longer than necessary,' said Vash.

And the Emissary knew that already; indeed it was probably aware that Vash was reflecting on this fact. That meant that there was something more, something else it needed from him. Or more accurately, something he needed from it. He was still missing some part of the puzzle. The Emissary’s expression shifted.

Vash wanted to say that he had no clue what his final usefulness might be, but an awful premonition had dawned on him. It wasn’t going to be a simple choice.

'The Dyn,' he said. 'You know why they invaded. You know why they are afraid of us.'

'I do. In the years after the invasion, I received a broadcast,’ it said. A half-forgotten memory stirred in Vash’s mind, a sentence handed to him long ago. ‘You will watch it, then you will speak to the Dyn, then you will decide the future. Understand.'

'But why me? Why me specifically?'

'You were not chosen. You and… Aurelie - if that is what she wishes to call herself - have the advantage of perspective. You will need that. Another survivor would have been sufficient, but there is no-one else. I am sorry.'

'That has been the story of my life. I think, finally, that I’m in the right place.'

'I think so too.'

'I’m ready.'

‘Observe.’

The Emissary vanished once again, and Vash fell into a nightmare.

Chapter 20: Determination

Corbin believed that places had moods just as surely as individuals did. The Hollow Tower for instance - the feeling in the atrium that morning was that of being stood on a beach and noticing the tide pulling back to the horizon. Corbin himself sat in Vash’s chair, behind Vash’s desk, feeling vaguely like a kid alone in his father’s office - not that there was really any time to relish in that particular illicit sensation.

Printouts strewn across the desk described the Dyn ships in orbit, manoeuvring like agitated wasps as they tried to keep the Earth’s surface in sight. Of Vash and the bathyscaphe there was no news.

They were alive. They had dived beneath the ocean to recover something and the Dyn had worked themselves into a frenzy over it. He was certain. It didn’t take a genius to realise that Vash had sought and perhaps found something in that abyss that threatened the Dyn’s grip on humanity. It would be stupid to blame Vash for not trusting him with such a secret. Vash had left Corbin knowing he would figure out his role on his own. That had to be the truth.

Restlessly, he stood, turning to the window. Heavy clouds occluded the sky, hiding the frantic manoeuvres of those above from the oblivious city below. Out towards the horizon transient rays of sunlight dappled the sea. The rumours of what had occurred were spreading beyond the Arco leadership; Corbin had seen to that himself, and with those rumours came fear and hope.  The suggestion of a revolution that might change everything, or bring down the firmament’s wrath.

He would soon make a public announcement, something that presented him as the acceptable face of resistance and defiance, someone working within the system in order to overthrow it. This reputation would be necessary in the world to come. Timing was crucial.

Idly he picked up a printout from the desk, one describing Dynic movements in the last twenty-four hours. The layered ellipses of the main constellations rising and falling, describing a cage around the Earth. He knew their exhausts were ionized hydrogen and oxygen, the disintegrated wrecks of water molecules broken down by the radiance of fission. It was simultaneously a technology of great power and something barely beyond a primitive steam rocket.

In a pinch, that technology could just about propel a manned ship from Earth to the outer planets. It was fantastical that the Dyn had reached Earth from an unthinkably farther distance, but here they were. The future had made fools of Vash and his ilk. If he wasn’t clever and careful it would make a fool of him too.

Next on the pile was a sealed message from Koslov, a demand for a follow-up meeting about the Broadcast. Waste of time, Corbin thought as he dropped it unceremoniously into the incinerator. The man was so caught up in byzantine Arco intrigues that he couldn’t see the wood for the trees. Him and all the others, so blinded by their terrestrial perspective that they had sat on the key to understanding the Dyn for decades and not understood!

He couldn’t avoid thinking about it.

Corbin closed his eyes and saw Dynic bodies piled so high that his mind made them into low hills. The bodies were swept aside and burnt away, caught in the blast of a rocket escaping that charnel house. Others followed, thousands of ships spreading across the unknown depths of space like dandelion seeds. And everywhere they settled the damnation of the Dyn spread. The Broadcast was all he could think about, because it was still happening. Right now. It was no less real for being separated from this city by time and space.

What was the first thing he needed to do, in order to save them?

Whatever came next, Corbin would be ready. Loyal Enforcers had drawn up lists of those he might trust, those that he needed to watch. It would not be easy to cement his power, yet he was almost tempted to see it as a fait accompli. He and Vash would work together as they always had; they could not communicate, but they would cooperate.

Unless he fails, said a quiet voice in his head. Perhaps it was faith to expect Vash’s secret plan to save them. What hard evidence would he have, if someone else asked, that Vash really was searching for something at the bottom of that ocean?

The phone rang. The phone that wasn’t for ordinary calls. It was in Corbin’s hand before he had time to fully process the fact.

K’txl, Liar to Animals, spoke.

‘Congratulations on your accession. Word of your mastery of humanity precedes you - I understand you formerly worked for InSec? I only wish this change had come at a more opportune time.’

Vash had been right to describe the experience as disconcerting. The voice was feminine but the affect was jarring, alien in a way Corbin couldn’t quite determine. He gathered himself.

‘As do I. I’m honoured that you chose me for this role,’ he said through gritted teeth. Of all the roles he had to play, submission came least naturally.

‘I did not choose you. Vash designated you as his successor. I merely accepted his decision. He showed unusually sound judgement for a human before his… recent error. I regret his death. He offered guidance and knowledge. His was the first step in my becoming closer to your… people.’

Species, Corbin thought. She meant to say species, but said people instead - as if she genuinely meant the sentiments she expressed. It was a strange thought.

‘Vash embraced my vision; he could see that it was necessary that humanity and Dyn understand one another. I hope that you will continue your predecessors greatest work, Ambassador. I hope that his faith in you was not just another error.’

His faith in you was. It had always been Vash’s weakness, his compassion spilling beyond every prudent moral horizon.

‘If I can help you further that goal, then I will,’ Corbin lied. There would be no understanding. How could there be after what he had seen? Had Vash seen the Broadcast?

‘You can, and in return I will protect your people from those that would end them. I’m sure that Vash warned you. I will reiterate, in order to impress upon you the gravity of the situation. The loss of my favoured heir. The growing chaos on Earth. My position is threatened. Vash’s actions, whether intentional or - I hope - not, have further undermined me. You face imminent extermination if I cannot get this situation under control. It is for mutual benefit that you help me. Tell me Corbin, what is it that Vash concealed from me? What drove him to such madness?’

Corbin hesitated, the silent line hissing softly in his ear. There were too many things to say and too little time to say them with anything like the required level of careful calculation: it would have to be the truth.

‘If you want honesty, I’ll ask that you return the favour,’ said Corbin sharply, dropping diplomatic tact. ‘You have no reason to believe that Vash is dead with any certainty. Indeed, you believe, as I do, that he made it off that beach, and that is what really concerns you. What if he wasn’t mistaken? What drove Vash, a man you almost thought you could trust, to betray you?’

‘Well?’ she demanded. The word was like thunder.

‘I don’t know,’ said Corbin simply. ‘Beyond the odd cryptic remark, he told me very little.’

‘The understanding we’ve reached… he risks everything. For what?’

‘I understand you well enough already. I’ve seen the Broadcast, K’txl. I know what you really are. You’re monsters, every single one of you.’

It was K’txl’s turn to fall silent. Or at least, the marionette K’txl spoke through did - her voice momentarily replaced by a soft, guttural clicking. The sounds of the alien behind the mask.

‘Why couldn’t you have just left us in peace?’ the voice sounded plaintive - a stern teacher telling him he’d brought this all on himself. It was maddening. His grip tightened.

‘Left you in peace? So we’re doing this, all out in the open? Fine. As far as I’m aware it was you that chose this path. That you chose to destroy us rather than face the judgement of your peers says it all. We could have redeemed you. It would have been easy for the people we once were.’

K’txl made a startled and surprisingly human sound; disbelief, or shocked laughter.

‘You do not know what you once were - Vash had the benefit of perspective at least. Your directness is refreshing. Your myopia is not. Delusional: you wish to abuse our bodies and our minds, rip our whole culture and existence apart and turn it to something other than what it is, unmake our whole species, then you have the temerity to call us by your word of evil when we refuse to lie down and surrender to your kind ministrations. Did we seek to wipe out humanity because of what it is, what it cannot help but be? Or did we find a compromise? Already our two species are more alike than they were at contact. Think of what we might achieve after another millennia of peaceful coexistence.’

‘This is not a peaceful coexistence. Until you change we can’t ever live in peace, and I’m very glad of that fact - because I don’t want to. To turn a blind eye to your crimes would make me complicit in them.’

There was a soft, girlish laugh. Corbin’s brow was slick with sweat, and he felt a yawing in the pit of his stomach. For all he knew a rock could be on its way already; but would it be so bad to die whilst speaking the truth?

‘Perhaps I should have expected you to say that. The Broadcast was a mistake - you were not ready for it. So be it. But if I cannot have your amity, maybe I can still offer you something you want. Maybe then I can earn your trust.’

Corbin laughed emptily. There was nothing.

‘That we met is impossible, and an impossibility implies the falsity of all current beliefs. You know of our history, yes? Seeker and her coalition first flew into space hundreds of thousands of years ago. And yet the universe is billions of years old. Draw two random stones from a beach, weigh them, and ask yourself how likely it is that they should weigh the same to almost within the finest tolerances of your instruments. Only if they were made that way. Our origins are too similar in time for it to be sheer coincidence.’

Corbin had heard that insane story before. K’txl had clearly spent too much time listening to Vash.

‘I’ve wondered something similar myself. What does it matter?’

‘It matters because whether there is a thinking enemy or an unthinking catastrophe awaiting us, we cannot face it alone. You are clever, creative and capable but you are all fantasists. You live at a greater remove from reality. We don’t want to change you, and we never intended to hurt you but still we must learn to live in peace. I admit that we need you. You will come to realise that you need us too.’

‘So, what do you want me to do?’ He couldn’t quite hide his disdain. How had Vash managed it?

‘I want you to recall Vash from the ocean and surrender him to me. If what I have just said was not enough to sway you then please tell me how many more deaths I must supply to assuage your pride. I beg you to be reasonable.’

The signal cut off. Corbin slumped back into his chair, bile rising in his throat. What had he just done?

Well that went well, he thought, darkly. I’m sure we’ll have a productive relationship. And if not, one way or another, at least it’ll be mercifully brief.

It was a simple enough tactic - carrot and stick. Let's all work together for the greater good, and if you don’t we’ll kill you all.

Chapter 21: Conspiracy

Little more than an hour had passed since their arrival, though it was hard to tell in this timeless place. Nevertheless, they’d grown restless. The white-walled chamber gave them all the creeps.

While the phantasm calling itself the emissary hadn’t returned, Jan occasionally caught a glimpse of starfields out the corner of his eye. It was worse when he closed his eyelids. He could only assume the others saw the same, although any shared experience remained unacknowledged.

He understood that this space was interfering with his brain. If what Vash had said was true, machines he couldn’t see were reaching out with electromagnetic fields and making him hallucinate. That might explain why little had happened until they’d opened the hatch.

Jan had always done his best to be reasonable. He’d taught Eva to never believe in fantasies like ghosts, immortals or demons from beyond the sky. But here he was, trapped beneath the ocean with all three.

Collectively, they agreed to move the Dyn from the sub. Whatever happened, it seemed reasonable to separate the alien enemy from their only means of escape. In the shadows of the cabin, trussed and bound, it looked genuinely helpless; a listless, pitiful, half-dead thing. They approached it warily at first, in cringing anticipation of one of those long limbs lashing out, but the Dyn remained motionless. It didn’t resist, but it didn’t cooperate either; it barely even reacted as Jan and Pao each shouldered one of its forelimbs.

‘Surrounded by godtech and somehow we still get stuck doing manual labour,’ grunted Pao, putting on a brave face. ‘It’s almost reassuring.’

Jan retched at the Dyn’s oily, inhuman stench. Its skin felt like plastic to the touch, the muscles beneath contorting strangely; just familiar enough to trigger revulsion.

‘It’ll all be over soon.’

Even in his own ears the words rang hollow. Pao nodded, heaving the Dyn out of the open hatch. Jan noticed a thin smear of milky fluid where it had brushed him.

Privately, he worried that the Dyn was dying of exhaustion. Perhaps it had expended its final reserves of strength just getting off the beach? How long could it go without food? How severe were its injuries? For all he knew this was just some perfectly mundane state for the Dyn, like being asleep.

‘We should see if we can find a cell or something, somewhere we can keep it contained,’ he suggested. He sorely wanted to hole up in the bathyscaphe until Vash and Aurelie returned, but he had to get the Dyn alone. Time was running out.

‘I don’t see why we’re still risking keeping it alive,’ muttered Pao. ‘I get that offing it in the bathyscaphe was too dangerous, but now… why not?’

‘It’s our prisoner.’

‘Come on Jan, it wanted to be here. You helped it get here,’ said Tuva sceptically, from a few feet off, laser still trained on the Dyn. ‘Sure it’s bound now, but - ’

‘We’ve already seen this… this thing,’ he gestured, sweeping his free arm expansively, ‘rescue the bathyscaphe, open doors in the walls, get inside our heads… Do you want to find out how it reacts to us using a weapon, to us killing something inside it? What if it really does need the Dyn here, the same way it needed Vash and Aurelie?’

‘He does have a point…’ Pao conceded. Tuva considered it.

‘I can’t believe I’m saying this but fine, we’ll do what Jan said,’ she relented, shaking her head. She turned to Jan, her tone suddenly deadly serious. ‘If you think I’m taking my eyes off you or the Dyn, think again. No more chances.’

Tuva held his gaze for agonising seconds, her eyes searching his for something she could trust. He said nothing.

‘So now what?’ called Pao, as Tuva strode over to the wall of the chamber.

‘Can we follow them?’ she asked, groping at the patch through which Vash and Aurelie had left. Growing frustrated, she beat against it.

‘Give it up Tuva, they made it clear that they don’t need us,’ groaned Pao. We’re here cos of a mistake, nothing more. Now we just stay out of the way.’

It was strange to realise just how vague and ill-considered Christo’s revolution had been. But then, it was never intended to overthrow Arco. Their one and only purpose had been to deliver Vash and Aurelie to this place. It didn’t need saying that he, Pao and Tuva no longer mattered. They were little more than ballast now; everything important taking place on the other side of that wall.

‘So what, we just sit here? You're taking marching orders from the dictator of the world now? He’s the enemy. Nothing’s really changed. Even the Wastelander knows that,’ snapped Tuva.

‘Something tells me Arco’s fired him by now,’ Pao replied with a sardonic grin.

‘There has to be another way out. How could Aurelie have known?’

‘Same way she’s known everything else. She gets this thing, this place… ’

Jan cast his eyes around the chamber, looking for some alternative exit. Nothing leapt out at him, but there wasn’t all that much to take in.

The waiting room of the gods, everybody.

The space was irregular, vaguely oblate, the walls almost smooth and subtly patterned. Beneath them the floor was minutely perforated, a grille of overlapping fractals. Jan guessed that was where the silver machine had seeped away to and that the whole chamber might flood and drain itself, if desired.

Suddenly he was struck by a flash of insight. There was a sensation of discovery, of openings and forking paths. It was over as quickly as it had begun. But now Jan found he could read the space, the way Aurelie must have just intuitively understood. It wasn’t hard, now that he knew what to look for. The wall they’d left through was somehow fresh-looking, and there were at least two other circular patches, matching filigree patterns converging on them. How had he failed to notice?

‘Try over there,’ he called to Tuva, gesturing towards the nearest one.

She walked over, making no effort to conceal her doubt. Tentatively, she placed her palm against it. The door slid open. The corridor beyond curved out of sight.

‘Lucky guess?’

‘Just a hunch,’ Jan replied. Where had that insight come from? Was the intuition his own, or had it been planted there by something else?

It was an unsettling thought. He pushed it aside.

‘Hmmm. Better than nothing. Let’s try it.’

‘I’m not dragging the Dyn the whole way. Let it walk,’ interjected Pao, before she could take another step.

Tuva scowled, but didn’t object as Pao slackened the ties that bound its limbs, while checking those that trussed its jaw in a makeshift muzzle and held the twin whiplash tails and foreclaws in place, mindful of what had happened last time. Jan hung back, keen to avoid any suspicion of interference.

Pao tugged at a lead and the Dyn stirred, lifting itself slowly. Its head tilted and it fixed Jan with a single eye, furiously trying to convey something across the gulf that separated their species.

If not now, when?

‘I know you can understand me. No sudden moves, ok?’ cautioned Pao.

Understanding or not, the Dyn gave no sign, but as Pao led it towards the corridor it complied. Jan went on ahead, with Tuva taking up the rear, laser levelled at the alien. It could just as easily be turned on him.

As Jan entered the corridor, the others just paces behind, all hell broke loose.

The Dyn, twisting round, threw its weight against Pao, knocking the man between itself and Tuva.

‘Get down! Get down!’

She hesitated for a moment, but it was enough for the Dyn to lunge clumsily for the doorway, sprawling onto the floor, just over the threshold.

Jan fired the dotbow. The bolt tore clean through her forearm, sending her returning fire wide, the invisible beam scoring an arc up the wall, skittering as the gun fell. She cried out in agony, clutching her arm. Jan was losing his balance, falling. He heard a crack.

The door slammed shut, far quicker than it had opened, triggered by some reflex to keep the danger contained.

As the seal thickened, Tuva’s pained cries and Pao’s enraged hammering grew muffled, then inaudible. The whole sequence of events was over in a blurred instant.

His heart pounding in his chest, Jan leant back against the wall, regarding the Dyn with apprehension. With the bathyscaphe on the other side, his last connection with the world beyond was severed. Just the two of them now. What leverage did he have? The dotbow?

The Dyn struggled back to its feet. Even hunched on all fours it was still as tall as him. Although its growing exhaustion was readily apparent, Jan knew that it still had reserves of strength to call on. What chance did he stand against it, alone and in such a confined space? He managed a despairing laugh.

‘Dad?’

The word hit him like a punch in the gut.

The sound was uncanny, stripped of something by the machine, the resonance all wrong as it emanated from within the Dyn’s body. And yet it was her voice, warped, stolen.

‘How are you doing that?’

‘I remember… ’ said the voice, and it stretched out, breaking up like a bad recording; ‘I remember the day on the hovercraft. I remember you teaching me to swim. I remember playing in the stream by the settlement, the notebook of investigations I used to keep… ’

‘I - I never told anybody that - ’

‘I remember when the shadows would come and how you would hold me and stroke my hair until I fell asleep.’

‘Stop! Please stop. How do you know those things?’

The voice could be skillful mimicry, but how could it know? Maybe they had interrogated her, but how would they recognise the significance of such personal memories?

‘Not knowing. Remembering. I was there. I felt it.’

‘No,’ said Jan, blinking back tears. ‘You are not my daughter. Eva is dead.’ Of course, he believed it, and yet the voice felt so real.

There was a shift in the Dyn’s body language. Eva disappeared, slipping beneath the surface, her voice replaced by the rasping, sibilant tone the Dyn had used before.

‘Eva lives. For now… ’

‘What do you mean by that?’ He breathed deeply, fighting to regain his composure. ‘Stop playing your games. I’ve done what you asked. Now tell me what you know. All of it.’

‘Untie me,’ the artificial voice rasped.

‘Answers first.’

‘You don’t want her to die. The others will kill her. You helped them,’ it hissed, shaking its head from side to side as though in admonishment, a curiously human gesture.

‘Where is she?’

‘In orbit.’

‘But you just said that you were her.’

‘You think in such flat terms. I am not Eva, but I contain part of her. Identity is mutable for us.’

‘You think I’ll believe anything? Sure I’ll believe invisible machines mess with my head and make me see things that aren’t there. I’ve seen screens and computers, is it really so different? Maybe Vash can live for centuries, and the Dyn can fly between the stars. It’s only impossible until it happens. But I don’t believe in souls and I don’t believe you can steal my daughter’s away and trap it inside you.’

‘Believe what you want. Like you say, only impossible until its happened. Your child serves the Liar to Animals, as her… conscience. So that she may understand humanity.’

The Dyn paused, as though noting Jan’s incomprehension.

‘A merger, one corrupting another. Cortical wiring and semantic skeleton generation and correlation, facilitated by cascading deep language models trained on Human-Dyn translation. Human and Dyn minds become one. I shared my mother’s thoughts, and she shares the thoughts of your daughter.’

Jan rubbed his brow. He thought he understood enough of what the Dyn had said. It made him shudder to think of his daughter plugged into the mind of a monster. How she must have suffered. How she must still be suffering, he corrected himself. But if the Dyn wasn’t lying… if what it had said was true, if she was still alive… Jan felt joy surge through him. Then it dawned on him.

Vash and Aurelie had found what they were looking for, the Dragon’s Tooth. The plan, it seemed, was to empty the sky, to bring it all down, to destroy the Dyn in orbit. All this time he had been working his way towards killing his daughter.

‘We have to warn them! We have to warn Vash and Aurelie. There’s still time. We can exchange hostages - you for my daughter. You say Liar to Animals needs you… Maybe she will surrender if -’

The Dyn laughed. The sound was chilling.

‘Warn them?’ it mocked. ‘They already know.’

‘What’s that supposed to mean?’

‘Vash was Ambassador. He met with her. They don’t care. Ask him. What is one life compared to billions?’

‘Christo’s revolution… it’s bigger than any of us, but surely… ’ Jan trailed off. He felt like he might collapse.

‘They will let nothing divert them from their mission. They hate us, Jan.’

The Dyn pressed its broad head against his, forelimbs planted on either side of him, backing him up against the wall.

‘Why did you have us bring you down here?’ Jan asked, barely managing to keep his voice level. ‘What do you want?’

‘My inheritance,’ it snarled. ‘But I want this for all, Human and Dyn alike. My Line has seen the truth. Christo was misled, as were you. Aurelie, Vash… they lie Jan. They say they want to free you from us, but there will be no freedom for you in the world they seek to resurrect. You will be enslaved by their algorithms, their machine gods; there is no room for dissent. Those that oppose them are wrong. Those that oppose them are… evil.’

Chapter 22: Annihilation

Vash snapped back into reality, disoriented and reeling from what he’d seen. He was no longer where he had been. The room he found himself in now was dimly lit, more expansive. The centre of the construct? Someone was standing over him, playing with invisible shapes in the air. Dark, cropped hair and sharp, wide eyes. Beautiful, in a way that didn’t quite seem human. Vash felt he should recognise her.

‘Aurelie.’

‘I’m here,’ she said, resting a hand on his shoulder. ‘You can take a moment to process it. I did.’

‘All the centuries I’ve lived wouldn’t be enough,’ Vash replied. ‘I suppose a moment will have to do.’

He breathed deeply. It felt wrong that he wasn’t incapacitated by grief or shock. There would be time for that later.

‘To confirm: you saw the Broadcast. You saw the story of the Dyn as they would tell it.’

Vash nodded slowly, his gaze fixed on the middle distance.

‘Let’s not equivocate; what I saw was a species multiplied across millions of worlds whose very biology compels them to slaughter and enslave one another on a scale that is almost incomprehensible…’ As he spoke the images returned to him, unbidden. He forced himself to continue. ‘Every world they settle is a charnel house. You could excavate entire planets to find the mass graves they’ve dug… Aurelie, I knew of the Broadcast through rumours. I’ve seen isolated, contextless fragments over the years. But to see it like that, in full… ’

‘You have witnessed them for what they truly are, Vash,’ Aurelie said, placing her hand on his. ‘Now let us do what must be done.’

Vash sagged as the images sleeted through his mind, a nightmare vision plumbing deeper depths of depravity than even the most brutal chapters of human history.

‘Kill them before they kill us?’

‘Leave your conflicts to the moral philosophers of a free Earth,’ she said sharply, before softening her tone. ‘Vash, look at me. The questions of what the Dyn mean, of how we should understand them, interact with them - they’re important. But they count for nothing if everyone is dead.’

‘Something’s changed, hasn’t it?’

‘The warseed network relayed a Dynic ultimatum whilst you were out.’

‘There’s no precedent for that, there’s been no direct address from the Dyn since -’

‘They know we survived the battle on the beach and even if they do not know the specifics of our plan, they know something’s up. For every hour that we don’t surrender, they’re levelling another conurbation. We no longer have the luxury of time.’

‘Did we ever have that?’ Vash massaged his temples. ‘K’txl’s grip on power was weakening even before this. She needs to make a show of strength. When was the ultimatum delivered?’

‘We have thirty-three minutes to make up our minds, if that is what you’re asking.’

‘I have to talk to the Dyn.’

‘Vash - ’

‘K’txl as good as told me the truth. She told me the Dyn were afraid of us, that their actions were preemptive. I couldn’t see what she meant. It wasn’t just our minds, it was our priorities, our goals. They fear our ethics, because of what they could drive us to do. If we attack them, we prove her right.’

‘We are right,’ Aurelie said. There was no particular force to the words. ‘I don’t much care what the Dyn think about it. It doesn’t matter now - we have the weapon we need.’

‘We should listen,’ said Vash. ‘Isn’t that why you brought a Dyn here?’

Aurelie shrugged.

‘I wanted answers from it in case we needed them. I wanted a hostage, something that would all but guarantee your involvement. I don’t care about its moral arguments. The only reason it didn’t die on that beach is because Jan helped it.’

‘I thought so too… Suddenly I’m not so sure,’ mused Vash. He noticed Aurelie’s quizzical look. ‘Do you suppose the Utilitaria anticipated this and planned for a Dyn to be here?’

‘Come on Vash, even the Utilitaria couldn’t predict that.’

‘The Emissary asked that I speak with the Dyn before making my decision.’

A strange expression crossed Aurelie’s face. Confusion? Contempt? It vanished almost before Vash could even register it.

‘I guess it can’t hurt,’ she conceded, stiffly. ‘But do you really think that they will surrender?’

‘If they have reasons, that means they are amenable to reason. It means we can sit down and talk. Nobody has ever even been in a position to try until now. It’s sometimes easy to forget the tiny kernel of wonder in all this- the Dyn are an alien species, intelligent and self-aware, like us. We, I, always thought we were alone in the universe, as all logic suggested. But, somehow, impossibly, we share it with other minds. First contact! What we decide here could reset the relationship between our species and theirs. Just think of what we could learn.’

‘The Dyn are the enemy. The surrender of a single fleet on the fringes of their expansion would not change that fact.’

Vash shook his head. Hate wouldn’t help him or them, so he would not feel it.

The world played an unfair game. How was a twelfth century peasant supposed to discover a cure for the bubonic plague, or a sixteenth century Inca defend himself against gunfire and steel swords?

Those were the words he had consoled himself with, when K’txl had threatened to wipe out Conurbation One in an apparent fit of pique, if he refused to commit an atrocious crime. But it had been contrived, a false dilemma to test his morality to destruction. There had been another way, and he hadn’t seen it. He would not make the same mistake again.

‘K’txl - she isn’t evil. I think she genuinely wants to find an understanding. We have to return the gesture. Cooperate, not defect.’

Aurelie reached out an arm and hauled Vash to his feet, the chair moulding back into the floor. She hugged him tightly.

‘Very well. We’ll make a fine judge and jury.’

‘And executioner,’ said Vash as he pulled away. ‘Do not forget that part.’

The two of them stepped towards the sealed wall. Aurelie waved her hand in a practised motion, like a conjurer.

Why could she command this place so easily? Vash had only a moment to consider the question before the wall opened.

The Dyn stood just beyond the door. In one appendage, it held a bloodstained rifle. In the other, it held Jan. His face was a mess, blackened with bruising.

‘I’m sorry,’ Jan begged. ‘I - needed answers.’

Don’t freeze. React.

‘Pao and Tuva followed us into the tunnels… ’

Why would the Dyn take a hostage, if not to compel? They had something it wanted.

‘If you kill me, then no-one will ever be able to use the weapons,’ Vash stated, taking five rapid steps backwards. The Dyn slowly advanced. ‘Let Jan go.’

‘So, there are weapons,’ the Dyn hissed, its voice more sibilant than he had expected.

‘Lasers, hidden beneath the ocean, replicated. Enough to destroy everything in orbit. We can control them with a thought,’ Aurelie snapped. ‘Understand? Do not approach closer.’

The Dyn halted, still gripping Jan, vaguely pointing the rifle at them as though it wasn’t quite sure how to use it. Vash spoke.

‘I met K’txl, the Liar to Animals, and her conscience. That’s what she called her - the girl she had melded with. She told me we had to understand each other. That is what we will do - we will reach an understanding. The alternative is that I give the attack order. You'll kill us, here and now, and your Line and tens of thousands of others will die. Your occupation ends and a war begins. So, I will not ask again. Let Jan go.’

The Dyn released Jan delicately. It stepped back, still holding the rifle. Something had come over Jan’s face - anger, or vindication.

‘Eva...  so you did meet her... ’

Several things clicked together in Vash’s mind - the abductions, corroborations with rumours and things K’txl had said. It was true, and he had failed to notice until now. Vash’s thoughts exhausted themselves.

‘I did. She’s healthy, Jan. I can’t imagine the meld is pleasant but -’

‘You’re going to kill her.’

No. This is too much.

‘I get it, I know what you’re thinking. In the scheme of things her life doesn’t - but she  matters to me, Vash. I just can’t lose her. Not again. Not after all this - I… can’t,’ Jan pleaded.

Vash spared him a glance, but when he replied his eyes were locked on the nameless Dyn. It was horribly, blandly obvious that he could not consider Jan or Eva in his decision. It would not be fair.

‘If I can resolve this without having to fire a single shot then I will.’

‘Then hand control of the weapon over to me, to the Dyn. We shall take this as a gesture of trust, of understanding between species. The surrender of a duplicitous and dangerous artifact. You will be spared. Cooperation and peace will continue. Is that not your desire?’

‘It is,’ said Vash. ‘But not on those terms. You no longer have the upper hand. So we will put you in contact with K’txl and you will convey this to her. You will tell her to withdraw from the system. Those that follow her will be spared. Those that attempt retaliation will be destroyed.’

‘You may be able to destroy the fleet,’ hissed the Dyn. ‘But the rocks? How confident are you that your weapon can prevent them from being deorbited? Can it destroy them before they reach the ground? A single one is enough to scour the surface. You will emerge from the ocean to see nothing but ash and fire. Maybe the oceans themselves will boil.’

Vash shared a glance with Aurelie.

‘We will take our chances.’

‘The Dyn will never accept your terms. Certainly not K’txl. I know her thoughts. Fear is a natural response to overwhelming threat - it is what saved my ancestors, and yours, from extinction.’

‘We have both seen the Broadcast, the message you sent to humanity at our first encounter. We understand why the Dyn felt threatened, but -’ Vash began.

The Dyn shook its head back and forth. Was it a gesture of distaste?

‘After all this, you still wish to discuss how we care for our Lines?’ its voice rasped, incredulous.

‘Yes,’ said Aurelie bluntly. ‘So talk.’

The Dyn turned its head, assessing the situation one last time. It seemed to reach a resolution.

‘Your words are ill suited to the task. You understand our reproduction? Dyn lived on Firsthome for many ages, many myriads of reincarnations of the Line. We farmed, and adapted to it.’

The Dyn were not merely herbivorous, but evolved farmers, Vash understood. Their claws were ploughs; their massive jaws made for crushing plant material. What would humans have become, if they had lived with agriculture for a million years?

‘We produce many offspring, all independent. The Autarch must bring order. There are always too many children, and when they reach the age of maturity if not properly controlled by - pheromones? They branch off, forming their own competing Lines. So that there are even more children.’

‘You are mature and independent, yet you still follow K’txl,’ Vash pointed out.

‘I’m her heir, among the chosen few. I have melded with her. I will continue the Line. The Line is greater than the individual. The Line is eternal. The individual is only a cell - the Line is the body. Do you see? But the young cannot understand that, they’re selfish. They do not know that they do not matter, so they must be culled when numbers grow too large. The alternative is war without end. It has always been so - population always expands to match capacity. Your kind is less… efficient, but in time, evolution would have guided you to the pinnacle we have attained, were it not for the waking dream you inhabit.’

They had spent too long evolving, Vash realised. The Dyn, trapped on their homeworld for geological ages, never advancing quickly enough to outrun it, had returned to the Malthusian condition. Despite their intelligence, they had adapted to produce more offspring as they became able to support more. When they had risen to true intelligence, they had discovered further methods of control. If that was all there was...

‘We can help. However your genetics work, it wouldn't be beyond us to make a difference, once we relearned what we once knew. We could modify you so you produced fewer children per birth, give you more fine-tuned control over your fertility, prevent your children from reaching mental maturity until after the culling - anything would be better. We would make it work, if it took every ounce of ingenuity we had. We can come together and save all Dyn, born and unborn. It will have been worth it, for all of you to reach this moment after thousands of generations. It can all culminate in what you decide, here and now. There would be no more slaughter, and no more conflict between us. That’s all it would take.’

The Dyn let out a rapid, exasperated click train.

‘Save us?’ it hissed incredulously. ‘The Lines would end, with no churn of life and mind to feed them. There would only be scattered Dyn, lone individuals. Nothing, like you: meaningless, insane disunity. The end of everything. I may as well offer to save you from old age with this.’ It waved the rifle.

‘Who are you, Vash, to sit in judgement of us?’ it continued. ‘You are human, we are Dyn.’

He said nothing. There had to be something, some argument or form of words that would make it see that this was all wrong, that what the Dyn had become could be fixed. But if there was, Vash couldn’t see it. He tried to imagine how somebody could convince him that the mass murder of children was a good thing. It was impossible.

‘Your curiosity is satisfied?’ asked the Dyn. It seemed to relax deeper onto its haunches.

‘I think we’ve heard enough,’ Aurelie said. She’d remained largely silent throughout the exchange, a calculating look on her face.

The Emissary, or at least the machine it represented, would be observing them, gathering information, seeing what they chose. Vash had tried to find a resolution, but time was running out. Aurelie was decided. So was the Dyn.

Never again, he thought. There would be other chances, when he was more prepared, when his position was stronger. But he could never forget that this time he hadn’t done enough.

It was all his fault. To think he had believed for a moment that he might trust it. He had wanted so much to believe the Dyn’s intoxicating promise. If only Pao and Tuva hadn’t somehow followed them into the tunnels… He’d tried to stop it, but it had thrown him against the wall like a ragdoll. He had watched as it casually slaughtered Pao and Tuva. Now he was its prisoner, a hostage, a human shield.

Vash had confirmed it. Eva was alive, with the Dyn, and if the weapons fired she would die. Somewhere else, somewhere that seemed very far away, Vash and Aurelie argued with the Dyn. He barely listened.

Standing before him he saw Eva.

She wasn’t as she would appear now - she was still just a young girl, no more than twelve - but her face was clear to him, not blurry with memory. Eva spoke to him, her voice somehow older.

You need to let me go, Dad. I may be alive but I’m not Eva. Not any more. I’m half monster, half lost. Let me go.

Silently, Jan pleaded with her, tears running down his cheeks. He could no more choose to let her die than water could decide to flow uphill. Eva laughed in that light, easy way that meant he was being silly.

People always have a choice. Keep your promise to Christo. Help defeat the Dyn.

He’d promised to protect her. He’d failed. She shook her head, squeezed his hand.

I promise you… you’ll see me again. I love you. I hold on to that. Now let me go.

He blinked away the tears and she was gone. He inhaled as deep as he could despite the ache in his chest, steeling himself for what he had to do. What he should have done.

Vash and Aurelie needed a few precious seconds - enough time to summon the Emissary and give it the order.

The Emissary didn’t need him.

That was the choice. He could do nothing and maybe she would live, or he could be the one to make her death happen.

He didn't waste time on hesitation.

Jan leapt for the Dyn’s weapon. Alien digits awkwardly fumbled the trigger and before it could fire he’d knocked the gun from its grasp, narrowly dodging a swipe from its free clawed forelimb. He spun and with every ounce of his strength punched the Dyn in the fleshy underside of its neck.

It let out a choking wail and stumbled, striking the wall, wrestling Jan down with it in a tangle of limbs.

‘Now!’ Aurelie commanded, cold and absolute. Vash squeezed his eyes shut. The Emissary coalesced over an agonizing, drawn-out second, and stood before him.

It looked into his eyes and nodded, its statue-like face betraying nothing.

‘Executing. Observe.’

Vash’s eyes snapped open, not a moment too soon; the Dyn was nearly upon him, an injured Jan staggering to his feet behind it. The seconds he had given them had made all the difference.

Before Vash could even react Aurelie was between him and the charging Dyn. She deflected a swipe from its claw with practised ease but it caught her off guard with a lash of its tail, slamming her against the wall. It turned the focus of its fury on her but before it could land a finishing blow she sprung up, landing another strike on its neck. Further off Jan, bleeding heavily from a wound to his abdomen, reached for the gun.

A piercing, disembodied whine exuded from somewhere deep within the walls, climbing in pitch. The surrounding illumination flickered and the entire structure shuddered, as though coming alive.

‘Go!’ Aurelie yelled.

Vash didn’t need to be told twice.

He started running immediately. Behind him he could hear the sounds of their struggle, the thuds of impact, pained cries and the hissing of the alien. He saw Jan grimly raise the rifle as he passed, the lights dipping again. Jan fired at something behind him, the gunfire drowning out everything else as it lit the room, a staccato clatter of freeze-frames.

As he entered the corridor the lights were replaced by dim emergency illumination. He ran as fast as he could, feeling as though he was pushing through cement, his thoughts racing ahead to the battered bathyscaphe, his only means of escape. He picked forks in the labyrinthine tunnels more or less at random with only the vaguest sense of where it might be, merely hoping to put as much space between and the Dyn as possible and praying the intentional architecture would respond. The sounds of their struggle grew muffled, increasingly drowned out by the world-ending electric whine. There was a final unseen burst of gunfire and somebody, or something, screamed, the sound distorted by the winding passages.

The floor shuddered again, throwing him to the ground this time as he lost his balance, tripping over something. A body - Pao’s or Tuva’s; he didn’t wait to find out. Something was chasing after him. As he lurched to his feet he heard it coming closer, gaining on him, a furious scrabbling, the low guttural clicks and whoops echoing ahead.

The Dyn was almost upon him. But then he was out of the claustrophobic tunnels, stumbling into the expanse of the receiving chamber. He could see the dark bulk of the bathyscaphe ahead, its lock still open, just as they had left it. He risked a glance over his shoulder into the gloom of the tunnel behind, and regretted it instantly as the Dyn rounded the corner.

Before he could cry out the door flickered shut around the Dyn, severing its tails and mangling a hindlimb. It let out a blood-curdling shriek. Still, the crippled alien dragged itself forwards, driven by malice and desperation, its limping gait still a match for his own.

Vash didn’t dare turn again in case he stumbled, instead he compelled his exhausted body onward, faster, so close now. He leapt for the lock, diving for it in a last feat, swinging it shut behind him.

The Dyn’s slavering maw slammed into the porthole moments later, the three gigantic jawbones scraping against the bathyscaphe’s hull.

As if on cue water exploded into the chamber, and the Dyn was swept away, crushed and broken; a mosquito under an anvil. Vash was thrown back against the wall as the explosive flood of water hit the bathyscaphe and the world went black.

Chapter 23: Finality

Jan’s eyes opened onto blackness and for a few disoriented moments he wondered whether they really were open at all. He sat still, waiting for his eyes to adjust, but the suffocating darkness never lifted. He felt around blindly, his hands brushing over something sticky on the floor, as he noticed for the first time the metallic taste in his mouth, the pain in his chest. With a growing sense of dread he touched it. It felt wet and wrong. He wasn’t going to be able to move far.

‘Aurelie,’ he croaked. His voice sounded small, like Eva’s after a visit from her Shadows.

There was no reply. Where was Aurelie? Had she made it out alive, leaving him trapped here in this tiny bubble of air beneath a mountain of water, only so he could die a little slower? Could he blame her after what he’d done. What had he done?

Had he redeemed himself? Would he ever forgive himself?

Jan felt lightheaded, his thoughts losing their focus and beginning to loop. He needed to staunch the bleeding. Tearing his shirt into strips, he did his best to bandage the wounds.

‘Aurelie!’ he called again, as loud as he dared. Only the echo of his own voice came back.

Maybe she was lying somewhere else in the labyrinth of tunnels, bleeding out like him. Maybe she was already dead. The unsettling image of the Dyn stalking through the darkened rooms, hunting down the survivors of its bloody rampage, came to him unbidden. He fumbled for his knife, even as he pushed the thought aside.

Jan crawled along the floor, every movement agony, his hands feeling blindly ahead of him until he came up against a wall. His breathing ragged, he propped himself up against it, knife in hand, gripping it tight.

He wouldn’t stand a chance if the Dyn came for him but that didn’t matter anymore - it was all over, one way or another. That was what mattered. Christo’s revolution had triumphed against all odds. They’d won, and this was what came after. All he had to do now was to survive for a little longer.

Jan thought about how it had come to this, trying to piece together the events that had led him here, but, although he tried, it made little sense. It was as though he had been a spectator, a bystander, watching his own body blunder from one crisis to another, without any real autonomy. He had been swept up in other people’s plans ever since he had left the jungle. But now the others were gone and whilst he lived for now the only end he had ever pursued was a lost cause. They had killed Eva. They had killed her, and he had helped them. Maybe it was the right thing to do. Maybe he had spared her a worse fate. It didn’t make the pain any easier to bear.

Jan didn’t know how long he sat there, slumped against the wall, but after a while sheer exhaustion and sensory deprivation began to set in, his eyes unseeing, his ears unhearing. Even the pain had become a background throb. He had to keep shifting his position and straining his eyes open but try as he might, he inevitably drifted into unconsciousness…

He dreamt the same dreams he always did, but they never descended into nightmares. Just memories. He could happily let himself slip away into the past…

He awoke.

He could see; there was light. Eva knelt beside him. She appeared older, as she would be now, her face in clearer focus than the hands he reached out to her with. She looked so like her mother. He gasped.

Was he hallucinating? Was this some ghost emanating from the dying machinery that entombed him? How could he ever know?

‘You’re alive?’

She didn’t answer, a playful smile on her lips, her hands on his. Jan knew none of it was real, but he decided to just go ahead and believe in it anyway.

It’s real, she assured him, proving nothing. You’ll see me again. I promise.

Then she was gone, the apparition dissolving into light.

The light stabbed at him, then suddenly it was drenching everything, flooding into the room. Armoured figures, indistinct against the brilliant electric light, emerged through the wall. Flashes of colour that Jan’s starved mind was unable to process filled his vision. Voices, shouting. Torch beams skittered around madly, piercing the shadows that still clung in the recesses of the chamber, resting on a body, smears of blood. Jan’s mind ran around inside his dying brain, desperately reaching for something he could understand, something he could cling on to.

One of the figures loomed larger in Jan’s vision. The figure, a mask covering his face, raised a blocky object.

‘This one’s still alive,’ he murmured to a colleague. ‘Haemorrhaging almost everywhere, collapsed lung, five broken ribs, irregular heartbeat and neural activity in decline. Horrible wounds in his abdomen. Kidneys aren’t going to be much good…’

‘No way he will make it,’ replied the colleague as he examined the other body. ‘Just shoot him full of morphine; nice and humane.’

‘We have to try,’ exclaimed the man standing over Jan, reaching for something Jan couldn’t see. ‘He may be our only chance of finding out what happened here. The Ambassador was very clear that he wanted all survivors -’

‘Not Ambassador anymore, remember?’

The man produced a cuff, like a neck brace lined with needles and pads, fitting it around Jan’s neck. The voices of the figures blurred together and sensation ebbed away. Jan found himself slipping out of consciousness, perhaps for the last time. He smiled. He was going to see his daughter again.

Chapter 24: Culmination

“A leader is best when people barely know he exists, when his work is done, his aim fulfilled, they will say: we did it ourselves.”

Lao Tzu

There was something wrong with the sky. It was early morning and the light shining through the big picture windows should have been - well, sunlight. It certainly wasn’t supposed to be a cold, actinic blue. It threw the contents of the room into sharp relief, hard contrasts separating light from shadow.

‘Well this is new,’ he said, to no one in particular.

He turned to face the window and had to snap a hand over his eyes, as the horizon exploded. Transfixed, Corbin heard the feed kick into gear as confused reports began to stream in, but he didn’t turn away from the window, his eyes fixed on the horizon and his mind occupied by still greater horizons expanding beyond. For long minutes he drank it all in.

A camera crew finished their hurried preparations behind him.

‘We’re ready to go, sir.’

At first few people had noticed the gentle bulges of water and unusual swells that appeared across the oceans of Earth. The vast collective weapon systems rose to the surface in stages, unfurling like some monstrous creature from the abyssal depths. The great deluge of displaced water produced surges that lapped at every coastline, but they were only the faintest hint of what was to follow.

There could be no warning. Within every bundle was a spindle of optically perfect hyperdiamond, a cluster of sensors and enough electromuscle to aim with pinpoint accuracy. There were several thousand Dynic craft in orbit. A dozen lasers aimed at each vessel, and from each laser poured gigawatts of coherent light.

Clouds are opaque to lasers, so the beams often didn’t travel more than a few metres before they were absorbed, creating an expanding bubble of plasma. But the power was so great that the next pulse of energy blasted straight through the bubble, pushing the water vapour out of the way as if the beams were drilling through solid matter. Focussed down to coin-sized targets, the beams could slice through dozens of meters of metal per second. The Dynic ships were blinded, then torn apart, then consumed as internal fuel and munitions detonated. Most died before they even understood what was happening. Some fled for higher orbits in disarray, never getting far before they too were caught in the frenzied destruction: you cannot dodge a laser, not at a range of mere thousands of kilometres.

In a settlement too minor to be a numbered conurbation, an Arco district officer was woken by a blastwave that shattered the windows of his flat. He rushed forward, pulling on a jumpsuit, curiosity overriding fear, and stared out at… nothing he could describe. From the thirtieth level of his housecube stack he could see the Southern Ocean roiling beyond. It was alive with the stabbing radiance of… what? It might have been aurorae, if aurorae were bright enough to turn night into day. It might have been lightning, if lightning streaked from the ground to the sky. His gaze followed the beam up into the morning sky.

Elsewhere, in a plane crossing the Atlantic Ocean, passengers gaped from their point of privileged vantage as the surrounding sky was lit up by otherworldly fire. Pyres of unnatural light blazed heavenwards, their wake leaving the aircraft buffeted by turbulence while all around it the atmosphere was set ablaze. The clouds twisted and contorted into strange formations, and steam boiled off the ocean as the Earth itself convulsed.

A woman at a market stall heard the crowd around her cry out at something she couldn’t see. Her home, Conurbation 6581, was more than a hundred kilometres from the coastline. But when she turned to follow their pointed fingers the horizon shone, a line of bright blue like an onrushing tsunami of light. She was elbowed by her friend beside her. He had lifted his arm upwards, to the night sky. One by one, the constellations of Dynic craft were flaring and winking out, like tiny flecks of ash.

And in a city that had once held claim to be the centre of human civilisation, men, women and children rushed out onto the streets, Enforcer and civilian, young and old, to stare up as the false stars faltered. Even in the morning sky, the flashes were visible, lines of light that signified not struggle but annihilation. The sky flared above them, lighting up the crowd like they were bodies rising from graves on judgement day, casting weird, skittering shadows. They didn’t understand what was happening either, but it felt imbued with significance. It felt like the end of the world.

Then there was a voice.

It emanated from the speakers and screens in every settlement and Conurbation on Earth. The face that appeared on them was unfamiliar to most. Instead of the weary and distant gaze of the Dyn’s puppet, Vash, there appeared a younger man. He wore an Arco uniform, pressed immaculately, bronze delta on his breast. He looked vital and assured, as different from the last as any man could be. Some Arco execs shuddered to see his face. While the false stars flared and died above them, the man spoke. He leant forward to the camera, as if addressing every one of the huddled billions personally.

‘Hello everyone. I know the lightshow is very impressive, but I would like your attention for a moment.’

All across the world, people began to turn their gaze to the screens. In the crowded streets of Conurbation 131, Enforcers struggled to contain a stampede as people crushed their way onto the streets. In other places, wastelanders in their firebreak-ringed villages crowded around radios, glancing up at the sky as they did. There weren’t many false stars left. In fact, there were almost none.

‘I don’t come before you as a representative of someone else, as a puppet or ‘Ambassador’. I am here, speaking to you, as myself - as Corbin. I’m here to tell you that the occupation is over. That today, a brighter day has dawned. A brighter day than we have seen in all our lives. Our oppressors, those above - the Dyn - are fleeing and dying as we speak. Nobody holds dominion over us now, there is only nothingness above. From here on out, we choose our own future.’

Corbin stopped, and a few seconds later the lagging translators stopped too. The Earth fell quiet, as people collectively held their breath, waiting on his every word. In the streets of Conurbation One, Enforcers let their guns clatter to the ground.

For some onlookers, Corbin’s words made no sense. They didn’t know what the Dyn were, and had only the faintest idea that there were powers beyond Arco ruling their lives. Most were shocked for a different reason.

‘I made this happen. For years, I have planned for this day, the day of our ascent. It fills me with joy to see the aims of our revolution fulfilled,’ he smiled and seemed on the point of laughing.

In Conurbation 771, someone let out a whoop. The rest of the crowd picked it up, and in half a minute a crowd of thousands was ecstatically cheering the name of a man they knew nothing about. In other places, people simply gaped where they stood, or shouted that it was all a trick, that the Dyn’s world-ending reprisal would come any moment now. In some places there was even anger - who was this ‘Corbin’ to declare such a thing?

The panic and joy that did exist were outweighed by an exhausted relief. Old men and women stared at a still night sky for the first time in their lives. People staggered, or felt their legs collapse from under them as they realised what had happened. Some people laughed, many more wept.

‘I know that Arco has not always been the promised shield of humanity, subverted by traitorous men corrupted by the lies of the Dyn,’ he said, his voice momentarily hardening, then softening as he continued. ‘But that changes today. We are your protectors. I am your protector, a duty I humbly accept. Safe in that knowledge, you are free!’

Above them, the last few false stars flared and winked out. The icy blue fleck that was the Other Moon disappeared.

‘So celebrate! Dance in the streets! Go home and rest, start thinking about how we get the world back on track. Arco will still be here when you wake up tomorrow morning. We have so much to do, but not today. Today, you can enjoy your freedom. And that’s an order, direct from Arco.’ He did laugh then. A few million people joined in.

Then the message ended.

The camera techs relaxed, giving him the thumbs up. The broadcast was out, but that was only the start of it. Others might still wait in nervous anticipation. Surely that couldn’t be it, could it? After all these years - over in a morning? But then they didn’t know what he did and even he didn’t have the full picture. The race to find what had befallen Vash was on.

Others were packing into the room, a gathering crowd waiting to hear what would come next. He recognised Koslov, and his executive undersecretary, a few generals and aides. They looked dazed. He didn’t feel dazed. How did he feel? Triumphant. Ecstatic. Alive. He stood from his desk, turning to the window. The morning sky was alive with the glittering, disintegrating fragments of the Dynic firmament.

‘We’ve won,’ he said. The world continued to spin on, and didn’t contradict him.

‘We’ve won!’ he repeated. Then he laughed, clapping his hands in the air. He whirled around, and pulled Koslov into a hug, still laughing. The man stood rigid and unresponsive. Corbin broke free and vaulted over his desk, staring up at the heavens again. He mimed drawing a gun, pointing it at the sky.

‘Just like that - pow, and gone!’

The fragments were still there, still glowing with the fury that humanity had unleashed. He let out one final bark of exultant laughter. There were tears in his eyes, but he wiped them away.

‘Right! Let’s get started.’

Vash was oblivious to all this as the bathyscaphe rose and surfaced on the choppy ocean waves. The massive front of water displaced by the rising weaponry had set the bathyscaphe and its one living occupant tumbling, powerless and adrift.

After struggling with the hatch for a moment, Vash heaved it open and hauled himself out onto one of the bathyscaphe’s hull plates, the equatorial sun, already hot, beating down on his head. The ballast tank had detached during his ascent to the surface, so only the buoyant, spherical crew cabin was left.

Mists clung to the ocean surface, the remnant of the energies the Utilitaria’s creation had unleashed and overhead, lights streaked across the morning sky as debris burned up on reentry. Before such a sight would have filled Vash with dread, heralding the final arrival of an apocalypse postponed for over a century. Now he only felt a profound serenity, albeit tinged with sadness that it had come to this. To kill or be killed. They must have won, then.

Vash permitted himself a smile at that – he hadn’t realised how fragile his hope had been, until he noticed how surprised he was at the victory. Sometimes things did go better than expected, and nothing that came afterwards could be as bad as what they had endured. There would be a future after all; one which promised potential rather than slow, grinding triage. He would be truly free to choose once more, no longer forced to merely inflict the lesser evil over and over again.

In time, he tied Christo’s blanket-bound corpse to some floats from within the bathyscaphe, and using spilt biofuel and a welding torch set the man’s body alight as he sent him out onto the ocean. It was a small gesture, lost in the wider scheme of things, but that didn’t matter – Vash felt Christo deserved a send-off, and somehow it felt even more important now to have some form of closure. The revolutionary hadn’t really been aware of the events unfolding around him, that had always been Aurelie. The man was a hero all the same. Selflessly, he had played his part.

Vash was panting with the effort by the time he’d finished, and collapsed back down in exhaustion. He watched Christo’s funeral pyre drift away.

After what might have been hours, Vash heard a wing of jets scream overhead, but he didn’t look up. Here, isolated and alone, he felt an absurd sense of calm. At last, he was resigned to whatever fate might bring.

Vash’s thoughts turned again to Aurelie. Just who was she - or rather, who had she been?  He knew she was a fellow survivor from before the invasion, lucky enough to have slipped through their nets, but there was more to it than that. She could command the warseed around them as if she were a higher authority than he…

Vash felt a wetness on his cheek and realised he'd been crying. Where was the sense in that? It was sad that she was dead, but he'd seen so many people die. Jan had given his life and his newfound hope of saving his daughter, all to save a world he didn’t truly understand or care for, but all he could think of was Aurelie. They hadn't even been friends, not really.

It went deeper than that. When he’d been with her he hadn't felt alone.

He must have slept after those thoughts had run their course, exhausted by the events of the last few days and decades, for he was woken again at sunset by the steady drone and buffeting of a dropship. The Enforcers helped him to his shaking legs, lifting him aboard. Vash’s vision was blurred with heatstroke and thirst, making him barely aware of what was going on.

He looked back one last time as they lifted away. The bathyscaphe was caught in a nest of organic-seeming fronds of spent Utilitaria tech. And that was it; the last physical connection to the ill-fated revolution severed, gone forever. Already it felt like it had happened to someone else.

He gratefully accepted a canteen an Enforcer offered, tipping the water into his mouth. He coughed and sputtered at first but then gulped the water down thirstily. Vash let his head loll back, exhaustion almost claiming him.

Corbin burst into the hold, looking more animated than ever, almost manic. So much for sleep.

‘We’ve won Vash, we’re free! The Dyn are gone, dead or routing. We can begin again, a fresh start for us all,’ he exclaimed, clapping Vash on his shoulder. ‘I never doubted you, never doubted you would live to find me again!’

‘Corbin, I - It’s good to see you again. Did you find any other survivors, any bodies?’

Corbin’s grin faded by an almost imperceptible degree.

‘Just a wastelander, half dead apparently, and two bodies,’ he answered, waving the question away dismissively, taking a seat opposite. Vash didn’t dare dig further. ‘Don’t you understand Vash? Now’s not a time for mourning. The Dyn are gone! You actually did it! I always thought… well… you always defended the status quo, argued for caution, inaction, but now, but now… They will rally to us, Vash.’

Vash shook his head, trying to clear his mind. It felt incongruous to discuss such things after what had just happened, but he supposed they had to.

‘I doubt anyone will be rallying to me. I’m the villain, remember? The Dyn’s puppet. Who’s going to believe what really happened? I can hardly believe it myself.’

‘Well no, it’s not the most convenient narrative,’ Corbin conceded. ‘I won’t lie to you Vash, there are many who would like nothing better than to see you executed, broadcast for all to see. But we don’t need revolution. We’ve had the revolution. Now we need reform. The people need a figurehead, a new face, somebody that can embody the changing of the guard, so to speak.’

‘An emergency government can’t last forever, not without cause. Without the Dyn in orbit Arco has no legitimacy. There’s going to be challengers. Within and without. Does that not concern you?’

‘Not unduly. What do they have on me? The man that brought down the Dyn. I think the people will accept me. It’s humbling. It’s the least I can do.’ He noticed Vash’s look. ‘Sure, a little bending of the truth will sometimes be necessary… But it’s done in service of the greater good. The last thing we need now is chaos. Now tell me Vash, let’s get our facts straight - what happened? How did you do it? I’m desperate to know,’ said Corbin, flashing him that sharp smile.

At Corbin’s prompting, Vash stumbled through a description of everything that had happened in the past few days. Well, not everything. There were certain details he omitted. Aurelie, for example. After all, a little bending of the truth was sometimes necessary. Corbin didn’t seem to notice. Vash could chalk it up to his exhaustion if things didn’t match up.

‘Jan, the wastelander you found, he sacrificed himself to save me… ’ Vash finished. Corbin leant back in his seat, clapping his hands together.

‘What a story! But it hardly matters how you survived, Vash. What matters is that you did and that you’re here to help me in our next great endeavour. We have so much to do! We have to consolidate, seek out the Dyn still hiding in the Reservations, and get people down to the seabed. The technology - the things those warseeds can do! We’ll have a human expansion rebooted in a generation with machines like that, once we’ve reverse engineered the godtech. Remember those dreams of a whole universe following the beat of a human heart? I don’t, but you do, and we’ve been given a second chance to fulfil them. But most of all, we have to make sure people remember the truth, that they don’t ever forget what we sacrificed.’

‘What we sacrificed?’

‘Well, of course. They have to know how we worked against the Dyn, how we concealed our plans for a strategic strike - ’

‘What do you mean?’

‘I mean people have to know that we are their liberators. Like you said, Arco needs legitimacy.’

‘I never said - ’

‘That is our claim. I was able to uncover what you saw in that symbol, in your cryptic mentions of dragon’s teeth. I understand that you couldn’t risk communicating it in any great detail with me so instead I anticipated the shape of what was to come and made plans. When those weapons fired I made a broadcast using the Ambassadorial public address privileges. All those people, wondering what was happening. I answered them. I told them this had happened because of events we set in motion. I told them the story of how they were freed, on the day of Ascent. That’s what we’re calling today, by the way. The day we wiped them out. It’ll be remembered for the rest of history, as will we.’

‘Surely you could have thought of something better,’ said Vash dully. 'Is it such a good idea to start this… new era, with all these lies?’

‘Come now Vash. Sometimes these things are necessary. Remember when Meyer showed up dead? I did that. I ordered him to save your position and save Arco, but he couldn’t see that there were things more important than his own pathetic life, and then in the end I was forced to… What matters is not the deed itself, but the consequences. Sometimes the stakes are high enough that greater crimes than a few mere half-truths are justified. You know that better than anyone.’

Vash wondered if he should say something, but he shut his mouth. Corbin seemed to be in full confession mode.

‘The situation is the same now,’ he continued. ‘It's necessary that I take the credit for what happened, and not poor Christo and his revolutionaries. It’s a burden we’ll both have to bear. Yes, it is sad that things had to end up that way, and history won’t remember their sacrifice. But what would they gain from it besides martyrdom? They’re dead. We can probably arrange a discreet statue or plaque. So will you help me? You’re not indispensable to my plans, old friend, but there’s always a place for you at my side. That’s if you want it. You’ll be valued as an advisor and frankly I think you’d relish the chance to stay out of the limelight. Am I wrong?’

‘If I don’t?’ Vash wondered.

‘If you don’t, you can walk away now. I trust you to be discrete. Most people think you’re dead or wish death upon you, after all. You could lead a quiet life, under a new identity, with a great dose of my gratitude for good measure. But I have a feeling you’ll want to take part, because there’s something greater still at stake, because how we respond to it will define our humanity. The Dyn. I saw their Broadcast.’

There was a moment of recognition.

‘You know of the Broadcast?’ asked Vash. ‘How did you -?’ he began.

‘Never mind that for now. We can discuss it later. For now, we’re heroes. So what do you say Vash?’ asked Corbin, offering his hand.

Vash looked away. Beneath them, waves were breaking on the shore and beyond that the whitish-purple jungle remained, unchanged. He didn’t feel like a hero. He just felt empty, used up. Just as before, the tide of events had swept him onward, overpowering any attempt he had made to swim against it.

‘I need some time, Corbin.’ Earth’s self-appointed liberator nodded graciously. Vash looked into his eyes, but he couldn’t read what it was he saw there.

Night had long since fallen by the time they reached Conurbation One, but Vash could still see a few faint glimmers, as debris slowly radiated away heat far above them. Shooting stars streaked across the night. An inane part of his mind wondered how much more difficult recolonising space would be with that many millions of tons of debris in low orbit. Earth had a bad case of Kessler Syndrome. Those asteroids the Dyn had towed into Earth-grazing trajectories would need to be moved away, urgently. The dropship made its circling descent, landing in the centre of the Hollow Tower.

Corbin stepped out of the belly of the craft, smiling confidently and waving. Vash followed behind, now dressed in a similarly formal Arco uniform. He kept his old overcoat, draped over his arm, holding himself up with the kind of strength and inner fire Corbin had displayed. Two squads of Enforcers saluted. In front of them were ranks of cameras, arrays of microphones, picking up everything.

From beyond the tower, Vash heard distant cheering, fireworks and music, growing steadily louder as they walked out under the vaulting main entrance. The cameras and mics tracked them both as they walked towards the plaza beyond, where adoring crowds awaited.

His heart lifted. The world would be a better place, now the Dyn were gone, whatever may be yet to come. Maybe Vash could, for this moment, believe it would all turn out for the best. Maybe this was what they all needed. Another brave new world.

