=== Seeker Story (from Note.txt) ===

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com Seeker 19 - 24 minutes

‘The mind is not a vessel to be filled, but a fire to be kindled’ Plutarch Seeker was born nameless, the spawn of a struggling line that had eked out a subsistence on the fringes of the Dusk for as long as ancestral memory extended. The domain to which she belonged was small; a knot of cramped warrens surrounded by a few square kilometres of marginally arable land. The sun rocked in the hazy sky, low on the horizon, large and red and mottled. Its constant motions were the only measure of time in this place, for there were no days here – just endless undifferentiated seconds. Mostly, the sun’s invisible rains nourished the crops, but sometimes its face grew stormy; the rain became a deadly hail and they would seek shelter beneath the earth. At the time Seeker was only dimly aware of how these systems wove together to shape her world. What set Seeker apart from her kin was her dissatisfaction. She hungered for knowledge in the way other Dyn hungered for an eternal line or an expansive domain. Through knowledge those things might be secured too, but they were secondary concerns. She had a true sense of curiosity; a mind of sparking fire that grasped at thoughts more rapidly than they could be set into order. But that did little to spare her. Like all her siblings, she barely remembered her childhood; the half-formed memories were suppressed by the pheromone-induced fugue of bonding hormones that flooded her body on the cusp of adolescence. Her sense of self dissipated, her nascent fertility was inhibited. As with all but the luckiest fraction of Dyn she bore the scars from that time; the relentless, desperate struggle for food, approval and survival. Seeker was never the strongest or the fastest. She suffered from constant malnourishment; her forelimbs grew slowly, while the hardened plates that formed her head were thin and brittle. The constant need to escape the cullings drove her to innovate, to adapt as the others could not.

Those were the times when her unusual intelligence stirred faintly, driving her to improvise weapons and tools that might make up for her weakness, or crafting toys and trinkets that would please the others. When Seeker was not working at the tasks set for her she rested, or fought with her younger, more ambitious siblings when they could not be placated. Despite the absurd odds she survived and rose to a position of some security, if not privilege. That all changed when her parent’s line ended abruptly. Her mother was caught in the open during a sudden sunstorm and killed before she had finished grooming her successor. Without a single carefully shaped vessel into which to pour her soul, the line sundered between her many offspring. Seeker was reborn prematurely and fell into a violent, terrible state. When the storms had faded, the now motherless Dyn fought and died in a conflagration of spectacular violence; a lashing of jaws, forelimbs and bladed weapons drenched in blood red light. When the bonding hormones left her system, Seeker felt her self-knowledge rekindle for the first time since childhood. This freedom was not without its costs; pain was enhanced by an awareness of pain. She despaired at her loss and feared for her future. She looked up at the sun and recognised it as the sun. She looked around at the fighting, the alliances that were forming and disintegrating as her home fell apart, and fled in blind fear. Her last glance back at the domain of her birth revealed the fields in flames. It was an anarchic total war, fought over a dismal scratch of land. The victor would reign over the ashes. As she stood on the hillside watching smoke billowing into the sky, she felt a new emotion burning in her. It was shame. Seeker’s body changed as she fled towards the Night. Her search for unclaimed territory grew desperate as her ovaries fertilised themselves, her biology responding to the rare chance to secure a limitless future.

At last her flight ended in a land utterly alien to that she was born into; a dark, twilight world where the sun’s disk never climbed above the horizon. She birthed her first litter in a hole in the ground. She was overjoyed by their arrival, paltry in number though they were, but was sorrowed by the thought that this might be all her line would ever know. Then the clouds cleared and Seeker gazed upon a sight that few Dyn had ever seen. The Night sky, strung with countless glinting points of light. In a flash of insight she understood – this was not a mere dome, but an infinite expanse. She wondered whether each of those lights might be a sun like that which nourished her world, whether they might have worlds of their own… If only there was a way to get to them, then the Dyn, all Dyn, might never have to fight for scraps again. Her thoughts raced ahead of her as they so often did. There was beauty in this new world, after all, and whilst this land was barren she took solace in the heavens. She had traded one sun for an infinitude – this thought gave her hope. She held it close in the millennia* that followed. Those times were hard. The children were set to working the earth as soon as they were capable; too young for the subtler kinds of mental influence, they had to be corralled by cruder means. Even out here some plants grew, but they were black and tough and had to be domesticated from scratch. Warrens had to be dug, they were designed to resist the harsh katabatic winds that blew in from the Night rather than to provide shelter from the fickle sun. Children died almost as quickly as they could be born, killed by starvation, exhaustion and cold. It wasn’t just the climate that culled the young. Great Hunter-Kites, scanning with echolocation, would swoop down to prey on the unsuspecting. Yet more dangerous were the other Dyn, the marauders that eyed her realm hungrily.

They were wraiths without domain or line, driven into the wastes by desperation as Seeker had been, but lacking her determination and ingenuity. That ingenuity served her well. With the end of those hardscrabble early years, Seeker turned her mind to more ambitious projects, so that she might further  increase the yield of her domain. Rudimentary greenhouses were constructed, steam was harnessed to heat the warrens and tethered balloons lofted massive mirrors high into the sky where they could ensnare the sun’s rays. As the wealth of her fledgling domain grew so did the threat posed by the marauders, who began to cooperate. Seeker watched these alliances intently, playing divide and conquer where she could and readying herself all the while. She was faced with a binary choice; innovate or die. The renewed prospect of annihilation honed her mind. Seeker toured blockhouses and workshops, ordering improvements that she envisioned in fevered dreams or on long walks under the sunless sky. The inevitable came without fanfare. Though Seeker observed with trepidation the hordes of spear and pike troops that massed on her borders, she knew she was prepared. When battle was joined her children, guided by improved metallurgy and tactics, cut down the numerically superior force with ease. The primitive iron weapons of the enemy were no match for hardened steel, and her superior military doctrine pressed this advantage. The dead became fertiliser, while the survivors were enslaved, working the expanding farms and gardens. Seeker’s domain, temporarily secured, grew more prosperous still. To have come from such lowly beginnings and achieve so much would have been enough for many Dyn, but for Seeker all this was merely in service of a far greater ambition; to escape the bounds of this world. At the time it was a thought she dared not confess to even her most loyal and favoured children. The others would never be able to understand, not until they were shown.

She knew that she might not attain such a lofty goal in this life, but maybe the next? Her quest for knowledge continued. Seeker sent out envoys and spies across the world; to the squabbling autarchies and the decadent eunuch courts to learn of discoveries being made out in the wider Dynic civilisation. Their interference spread rumours of a strange and isolated domain beyond the Dusk and with them, for the first time, a name. The Dyn told stories of one they called Seeker in a thousand copycat tongues. Nevertheless, Seeker’s efforts went largely ignored, her line a mere kink in the thread of the world’s great tapestry. The larger domains waged endless wars. As ever, the casus belli was the same; Dyn were not bound by ties of tribe or ideology. The wars were fought over practical matters – the control of bountiful lands and the endless Malthusian squeeze of population pressure. In the waning years of her life, Seeker was enthralled by the nascent field of optics and designed devices capable of magnifying the heavens. She took to venturing out on expeditions ever deeper into the Night. She mapped the stars and even directly observed other worlds sharing the Dynic sun. But whilst she gazed up in wonder, she was shrewd enough to never lose sight of the earth at her feet and so, in time, she began grooming an heir so that this life’s work could be continued in the next. Individual identity was a matter for record-keeping, meaningless in the greater scheme of things. The Dyn had ways to describe the culture and personality shared across generations; their lines had descriptive names like ‘Seeker’. But no individual, no matter how powerful, would name themselves. One’s own death was irrelevant when compared to the ebb and flow of the great lineages. In her final expeditions Seeker’s heir accompanied her every step of the way and when she died Seeker was entombed in ice, out under the Night sky, in defiance of Dynic tradition.

Seeker, her mind shaped into a close imitation of the first of her line, was born anew, her determination to push beyond the shackles of this world undiminished. For now, however, she remained bound by its laws and was drawn into the war of all against all, dictated by the logic of preemptive attack and competition for resources. Whilst to many the lineage of Seeker remained little more than a curiosity, the fruits of her innovation were clear enough to her immediate neighbours as she wielded her superior technology against them to devastating effect. Yet she didn’t expand far; never overstretching. Her eyes remained fixed on more distant frontiers. In one such conflict, as she watched gunpowder rockets arcing into the enemy formations, scattering them in disarray, Seeker did not thrill at their impending defeat but instead wondered whether a rocket might be able to leave this world behind altogether. Further experimentation proved that whatever a hypothetical rocket might be capable of, the technology was beyond her; the mass of powder swiftly grew far beyond what was practical. So Seeker shifted her focus to a far more niche technology. Guns had been largely ignored, seen as useful for static defences, but mostly ignored. Although attempts had been made to miniaturise them, high humidity made them unreliable whilst the oxygen saturated atmosphere made them dangerous. Such concerns did not dissuade Seeker. In the shadowy isolation of her walled keep Seeker devised fantastic designs that could hurl shells dozens of miles. None of the others could have guessed her true purpose – to pursue a fantasy with such single-minded determination was madness. But if the lineage of Seeker was mad, it was a very specific strain of madness. For she also kept abreast of developments in the wider world; the discovery of electricity, advances in chemistry, machines that propelled themselves with fire and steam.

Where she could she pressed these inventions into the service of her own ends, often improving on them; new ideas came to her with a fierce regularity. She also anticipated the dangers that such a blossoming of industry would bring. Every increase in food production simply increased the number of children born; in a mere century a single Dyn might spawn more than a dozen offspring. The outcome seemed as inevitable to her as it was obvious. The recurrent conflicts would extend into churning wars of attrition. There would be war without end, and it would be all-consuming. She redoubled her efforts. She accepted certain strategic defeats in the following centuries as she dug in and turned her focus inwards; enemies overran outlying lands whilst she encircled herself with heavy fortifications and entrenchments. The first great gun took almost a millennium to design and construct, whole broods were worked to an early death in casting the great alloy construct and assembling the segments together. It was erected within a secured mountain valley away from the sunward side of Seeker’s territory, deep in darkness and ringed by forts and barbed wire. Her survey teams and ranging devices determined that when it fired the slug tore a hundred miles into the sky. It wasn’t enough. More wars were fought, more time lost repelling nervous neighbours, afraid of Seeker’s newfound powers. The second gun was larger by far than the first; the projectile flared like a comet as it fled from the surface, a hot liquid fuel mixture igniting at altitude and hurling it still faster, almost fast enough that the curve of the world held it forever upwards. But it still did not reach orbit. Losses mounted as Seeker diverted far more of her resources to the project. Hosts of fearful domains attacked simultaneously. Seeker’s earlier guns were co-opted and pressed into the more mundane function of hurling explosive shells against her enemies.

She never invested many of her children into standing armies, preferring to scour the land around her clean. Mundane conflicts over food and territory could not hold her attention. Even aircraft, which enthused the other Dyn with their range and versatility, held little interest for her. Dirigibles or planes could never fly beyond the edge of the air. The stories she told herself and her children became more obsessive – lurid visions of colonies on other worlds, of an infinite garden and eternal peace. The last cannon, the greatest of them all, was completed after twenty years of work. Buried deep in a mountainside, riddled with staged charges and hydrogen gas valves, it was the largest machine ever built. Eventually her forces were broken and the enemy stormed past her final defensive line. As their armies advanced unopposed, the cannon fired with a detonation that shook the earth, the flash lighting the Night like a new sun. The solid booster burned a pale yellow as it accelerated. Seeker knew she had sacrificed most of her territory, but it didn’t matter anymore. She saw the second engine ignite, triggered by an electrical machine of her own design. It coasted higher and higher, moving fast enough that it would never return to the ground. It flew far beyond the edge of the air and blazed like a new star in the sky, fixed forever upward. That did it; Seeker had proven a mastery no other Dyn could match. Defeated and yet exultant, she was dragged before the autarchs of the victorious coalition to explain her actions. She did so. She promised an eternal peace if they co-operated. If every line had its own world, there would be no possibility for conflict, there would be nothing to do but persist forever into the future and tend to their world-gardens. She threatened eternal submission if they did not. Sooner or later another line would replicate her feat and if one held dominion over the heavens, one held dominion over all.

Word of Seeker’s gift spread and a tenuous peace descended on the war-torn world. The autarchs of the great lines and envoys of the eunuch courts gathered to observe a second demonstration. They witnessed her place another star in the sky. The idea of inscribing a mark on the heavens, of joining the world below with the world above, seemed to break something fundamental in the minds of the others. The meeting of minds that occurred was spontaneous – it did not result from some global call for dialogue. That infinite space above held opportunity, and all Dyn could sense it. The negotiations weren’t easy. Most Dyn spoke their own language, warped by transmission across countless generations and lineages and used only to instruct children, or to reinforce thoughts within their own minds. Communication between equals was not a common occurrence; imitation and the thrust or retreat of invasions were how Dyn spoke to each other. The process took decades. The meeting broke up with an agreed ceasefire, but ultimately a refusal to fully commit to Seeker’s plan. It was too utopian to be believed. They insisted she prove that survival in space, let alone on another world, was possible. Sending projectiles beyond the air had become easy, but its advantage was mostly symbolic. To send a living being would be much harder. A rocketship was constructed, utilising bleeding-edge technology, made of thick steel and tall enough that its nose broke above the waves when underwater. It was based in the shallow sea that bordered Seeker’s former domain, floated out on pontoons and filled with water. The target was the next planet out, orbiting a few million kilometres further from their red dwarf sun. It had an atmosphere similar to that of the homeworld and therefore, it was inferred, life. Seeker boarded the ship, having already delegated ownership of her lineage to her firstborn, whose mind and development she had carefully shaped.

For this brief moment, there were two Seekers on one world. The pontoons were retracted and the tremendous fission rocket motors ignited with a wave of hot steam- tonnes of impure water flash-boiled by the ship’s uranium core. Nearby islands, with their dense clumps of vegetation and hastily evacuated settlements, were consumed by the blast front. Clouds of irradiated steam gushed into the air, destroying all life for square kilometers. Adrift in the capsule at the tip of her ship, Seeker glanced back at the homeworld; one side shrouded in ice and night, the other storm-wracked and parched. Only in a thin band of bruised grey, where every square meter was intensely cultivated, could the Dyn flourish. But the line of Seeker had already broken that paradigm. The journey took less than a decade; though Seeker didn’t know it, the planetary systems of red dwarf stars were tightly packed. The target world drew closer, resolving into a planet of shallow seas and low islands. The planet was ringed by a curious silver bracelet that didn’t look like simple rock or ice. It also spun relative to the sun, a novelty that Seeker was sure would introduce many complications. How would her biology respond to a sun that moved across the sky dozens of times every year? Would a new lineage take root here? She felt how she imagined her mother must have done when she made her own fateful journey so long ago. Her fission rocket, intensely radioactive and depleted of reaction mass, was discarded along with life support and electrical power as she made her approach. The atmosphere of this new world was thinner than that which cloaked the homeworld. Entry was violent, and her capsule almost tumbled out of control. But the parachutes that popped out at the last moment braked her with a savage kick. Seeker’s capsule came down in the midst of a shallow pool barely deeper than her forelimbs and thick with life. Seeker stumbled out; her limbs feeling springy.

Her head tilted to taste the unfamiliar air. She was lighter here, the sky above was an unfamiliar blue, the sun was too high and too small. There were no mountains; the landscape of ponds and shallow seas stretched out to the flat horizon. The air was cool, and that strange ring loomed overhead. Coming here had always been an act of faith. Yet Seeker had expected to find sustenance, making the intuitive leap that two worlds so close together shared a common heritage. The life in the pool confirmed it – swimming among the plants were tiny, aquatic animals, their Y-shaped frames so familiar. She had but one final task. Before the sun had set she gave birth to a litter; the start of a new line on a new world. *The Dynic homeworld orbits close to its parent star and thus their years are substantially shorter than ours. Next

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com Frameshift 10 - 12 minutes

Previously No species reached beyond the air without bringing with them a spark of curiosity, Seeker reflected. Even her own kind, often narrow in their thoughts, had the will and the wit to wonder, to reach for things outside their domain. Curiosity had brought them from the lakes to the forests, coalesced them into Lines, led them to tame fire and fly beyond the air. On Firsthome, she had been the last to see the sky as the limit. She had reached beyond, landed on a new world. That self was long dead, but she had become an heir to a great dynasty, an undivided line. She had triumphed. Below her, she saw home. It was beautiful; shallow seas, tamed jungle, the regular, rational spirals of settlements, each small branch of the line surrounded by the whorls of barracks, farms and breeding-grounds. This world thrived like no other in her species’ history, unified by one mind, stable and safe. Around her, satellites and factories glittered, along with a few experimental habitats where unfavoured children struggled to eke out a life in freefall. She was leaving it all behind. The next of her line had been shaped and chosen, and her ship had been prepared. The craft was beautiful, as her kind understood beauty – to a human, it would still have seemed striking. The craft was wasp-waisted and radiated outwards at the fore and aft like a flower. Muscle-analogue tubes fed water to the quartz chamber of its fission lightbulb, the jet of plasma pushing it forward at a steady rate. Her destination was an anonymous asteroid on an anomalous orbit. The discovery had been recent; telescopes orbiting her home had noticed something tracking the planet below. Its orbital mechanics were wrong. Its surface was wrong. Its existence, in itself, was wrong. She had known this the moment a nameless child had relayed the information. The asteroid was moving too fast.

It traced out an ordinary solar orbit, one that ought to obey the law of gravity, except for the fact that it completed its year in a fraction of the correct time. It should have been flung out of the system with such a velocity as that. To most Dyn, it would have been a source of confusion but little else. Seeker would walk upon it, and discover the truth behind it. In front of her, two lower-children were hardwired into the ship systems. These were trained and conditioned to the point where they could translate her verbal commands into actions almost immediately. Wired up to feeding-tubes and oxygen membranes, they would remain there for the rest of their natural lives. At a gesture from Seeker, they began feeding mass to the great reaction chambers. She felt the pulse of power as her ship’s engines ignited, the glittering cataract of plasma pushing her forward. The burn injected Seeker and her mindless crew onto a tight gravity assist with Firsthome, where the earlier steps in her line had once walked, where Dyn had evolved. On approach, she looked out of the porthole at a bruised world. The wars were ending as domains and lines consolidated. The environment of the original home slowly recovered as Dyn learned to spread beyond the narrow band of twilight. Progress was being made there too, as Lines asserted rational control over their component Dyn. She was glad of that. Her ship made repeated passes, accelerating each time, tugged by Firsthome’s gravity. To most Dyn, such a time in isolation would have been a hell, akin to having one’s organs removed. To Seeker, it was time to think. Her approach to the asteroid was necessarily fast. Her ships’ radiators and drive unfurled for one final spasm of acceleration, bringing her within thousands, then hundreds, then tens of kilometers. Her own orbit was being altered, somehow, as she drew closer.

It was as if she were caught in a wake – the closer she drew to the asteroid, the faster she accelerated, yet she felt nothing. As her ship closed to a mere few hundred meters across the pitted surface, and her drive flickered off, Seeker found herself carried through space along with the anomaly, whipping round the sun in that impossibly fast orbit, feeling no tug of acceleration, seeing no puff of gas or ejection of matter that might explain how her and the massive rock below moved so rapidly. She had exhausted her fuel, but that didn’t matter. Seeker knew that this was where she wanted to be, and her life, severed from the grand progress of her line, no longer mattered. There was only this one, final task left to her. She pulled her spacesuit on. The descent was easy: Dynic ancestors used to swim in streams and lakes, which gave them a natural aptitude for moving in three dimensions, granting them the binocular, all-round vision that led to their early expansion in intelligence. The pitted surface of the asteroid, brown and grey, looked almost natural, but something was different. By the time Seeker’s grip-pads secured her onto the surface, the confusion had entered her consciousness. The asteroid was too young, with a scattering of craters that didn’t match with its apparent age. The regolith, jagged beneath her, was natural enough,  but it looked as if it had melted and reformed, or been cast from a mould. The gravity was too strong – something beneath her was heavier than it should be. The pale orange sunlight threw everything into sharp relief, the close horizon of the toy world making it feel unreal. She took a few hesitant steps with her grip-pads, kicking up plumes of dust. The subsequent hours of exploration turned up more anomalies. The surface was melted in patches that seemed to suggest informational content, spirals and whorls that were both like and unlike her own language.

The gravity changed and shifted unevenly beneath her, a tug more appropriate to a small moon than such a tiny chunk of rock. She understood that the rock was a covering, a thin shell that had collected over some dense, hidden machinery. How long would that take? A million years? A billion? At the end of the first day, Seeker found what she was looking for. In a clearing, cut out of the rock as if a footprint had stamped it flat, was the solar system. Spheres of featureless rock and metal were laid on the ground in a grand orrery, the size of a small forest clearing. There was a central marble the size of her head, surrounded by small pebbles a few body-lengths a way – the sun and its planets. There were trails behind each pebble, as if they’d been dragged in arcs across the ground, but she could not see any of them move. Why would they? Planets don’t orbit their stars in mere minutes. Seeker knew without having to be told that this model would match the real thing, that forces she couldn’t see were slowly moving the pebbles in synchrony with the real planets of her home system. She saw two on similar trajectories, of similar sizes, that represented her home and Firsthome. It was a representation, not an accurate scale model. It was meant to be understood, Seeker realized, as she approached, leaning over the model. As above, so below. The minds that made this – because there was no doubt at all that this asteroid was a made thing – wanted to be comprehended by anyone, no matter how distant in time or space. She felt a kinship across some indistinct gulf. Who had they been, to leave her something like this? Seeker hesitantly stepped onto the flat ground, taking care to avoid the pebbles. She spotted a different rock – a gemstone, perhaps, tracing a wide elliptic path that cut across the surface. This place – the asteroid itself, represented in miniature.

Seeker sat there for hours as her mind traced through possibilities, just long enough to see a couple of the nearest pebbles shift slightly – the inner worlds keeping pace with their real-life counterparts. If this was a message, then what was its meaning? Was it simply a proof of intelligence? Inspiration struck, the same inner fire that had driven her first self to the nightside of Firsthome, the same characteristic that had united her line across generations. She understood in a flash what this was. Seeker reached out, flesh unfurling, and grasped the gemstone, plucking it from the furrow it had cut. She placed it next to the pebble that represented Firsthome. Nothing happened. There was no pulse of power, no secret message from a long-dead mind. She was wrong. The sunlight shifted. Seeker glanced up, and saw the sun wheeling against the black sky. No thoughts came to her, because none would be sufficient. She looked up and saw her ship, radiators still unfurled, still waited undisturbed, caught by the same effect. The sun seemed to brighten and shift in colour, turning blue. The rest of the sky was black. Seeker wondered what the stars might look like, though they were lost in the glare of the sun. Seeker didn’t doubt what she was seeing – Dyn knew to face reality. She waited, interested, as the universe folded around her. She understood, somehow, that this was motion – though it was too fast to perceive. Minutes passed, and the distorted light shifted slightly. Then, like some ancient predator springing from a stream, Firsthome appeared before her. The sky snapped back to normality and it was just there, looming large, dark and light and twilit, eternally steady in the sky. Her suit radio chattered, hundreds of voices challenging, submitting, asking for clarification, wondering at the sudden miracle, an asteroid materialised from nowhere. The whole cacophony of her species, at her mercy once again.

Seeker glanced down at the orrery and the gem that lay beside the pebble. She looked at the sunlit bulk of firsthome. She glanced up at the stars. She did a mental calculation. She had moved here at almost exactly the speed of light. There were new lights, the shimmer of ships boosting out of their orbits to meet her, in confrontation or submission. Seeker wasn’t interested – she had a universe to explore. She reached down, paused for a moment, and picked up the gem. Next

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com The Other Moon 41 - 52 minutes

Previously There is star-filled space, a dim and distant orange-red sun and, off to one side, the umber cloud-tops of a gas giant. There is a flash of brilliant actinic light, and it appears like a conjuring trick, like the universe itself has glitched – the Other Moon, huge as a mountain. To all appearances, it is an asteroid – almond-shaped, grey-brown and pitted by craters, tall as a city. It sits motionless, ten thousand kilometres above the clouds, in grand defiance of orbital mechanics. Clinging to its fore end, in the midst of a flat expanse clear of boulders and canyons, is a curious stone orrery, a miniature representation of this stellar system shaped out of asteroidal rock. It was built when the universe was young, made to be understood. It is the control interface – moving a marker across the orrery will move the Other Moon, as if by sympathetic magic. In its midst of this orrery sits a hunched, suited, four-limbed figure, bony jaw-plates and keenly intelligent eyes searching, always searching, for something new to comprehend and master. She is an explorer, the most cunning and curious of all Dyn – and, as she would tell it, the wisest. She calls herself Seeker, and though she has already discovered much, her journey is far from over. Seeker relaxed, relieved to have escaped the threatening environment around Firsthome. Below her, the churning clouds of the giant world her people knew as ‘The Eye’ filled half the sky. She looked down at the orrery, at the gem she’d placed next to the rounded pebble that represented The Eye. That was it – the last planet to be visited. She was the first to see many of these places from orbit – there was Firsthome, her home, the inner rocky worlds and now The Eye. There were no more anomalies – absolutely nothing to indicate the former presence of the Others. She needed to look further. Seeker glanced down at the grand orrery – it was a perfect model of her home system, the First system, but that was all.

Of course, there were no representations of anything beyond the First system – but there was no fundamental reason for that limit. She just needed to give it the correct instruction. And then, the stars. “Tell me how you work,” she said, in her own language. No response. “Tell me why you are here.” No response. “Tell me who made you.” Seeker sat before the orrery for long hours. She had time – even if some foolhardy Dyn pursued her by conventional means, they wouldn’t arrive for months. Those who built this place had almost nothing in common with her except, apparently, a desire to help and to be understood. The orrery was evidence of that. If the Others could interpret the orrery, perhaps they could understand a code of hers. Seeker drew a grabber from the belt around her midsection, and began scratching in the ground. She had long since memorised charts of local space (local – when even the nearest star could never be reached in a hundred lifetimes of flight in the fastest ship ever built!), the only remaining question was one of projection. Extend a plane out of the First system’s ecliptic, scale distances correctly – one to one hundred quadrillion. Find and grind pebbles to a rough scale approximation. Scale their size by planetary mass – not radius. The pebbles in the first orrery weren’t scaled by radius. Make marks with the grabber to measure intervals. They don’t have to be exact – construct a new map in the place of the old one, but on a higher scale. Show interstellar distances. Make it understand where she needed to be. It was done within an hour. The orrery shifted beneath Seeker, the pebbles moving slightly as the Other Moon made corrections. It understood. This was not the end of the mystery. It was the beginning. Seeker raised the gem, and placed it next to the nearest pebble. The universe folded around her. The Eye and the First Sun disappeared. Dyn knew the meaning of their lives.

It was to play their part in the Line – immortal, omnipresent, all-consuming. The connection of parent to child, the unbroken chain of inheritance, provided a greater purpose than any single mind or body could contrive. The individual was a cell, the Line was the whole, the end-in-itself. Seeker knew her Line would endure. She knew her destiny was the universe. She had everything a Dyn could desire. Why was she not satisfied? The restlessness had begun when she first gained independence, breaking free of the warren of tunnels on the border of Night and fleeing into that cold unknown to found a new Line and domain. The search had intensified when she had reached out into the greater night that lay beyond Firsthome, leading her species into space behind her, discovering the false asteroid and uncovering its secret. She would never stop reaching for new boundaries to breach. The search was never-ending – the ending was the search. The speed of the engine Seeker stood on had turned the stars into a distorted swirl of light. The sky was black, aside from a single splash of blue light to the fore, in the direction of travel. Her asteroid moved so fast that even photons of light were twisted in their paths. The effect reminded her of rain droplets striking her jaw-plates when she used to gallop through the forests of Firsthome; whichever way she turned they always seemed to be coming at her. Her ship had been dismantled over the first weeks and months of her journey and reassembled into a makeshift shelter on the surface of her new home. This was not a true asteroid. It was a facade, a shell of accumulated rock and iron around something utterly incomprehensible, older than her species. She could expand out over its surface from here, melting and casting the asteroidal rock into domes. It would be difficult. The Other Moon had already taken her hundreds of times further than any other explorer had come. Already she was moving thousands of times faster.

Lightspeed – other Dyn thought it was something special about light, something like the sound barrier which her rockets and cannons had once broken and then left far behind. But this is incorrect. Time and distance are related at the most basic level of the Universe, both reflections of something higher. Talk of exceeding it is sheer semantic nonsense. You cannot count all the way to infinity and then go past that. But these limitations would not stop her. Practicalities absorbed the first months of Seeker’s residence aboard the Other Moon. Her ship carried bioreactors, a viable core of subservient Dyn, and a fully functional machine-shop. She lived, and learned to sustain life. Her Other Moon left the First System and continued on its way, following the path she ordained the day she had discovered this place. The pale blue glow of aberrated starlight was barely enough to illuminate Seeker’s habitat, assembled around the summit of the Other Moon, surrounding the grand orrery like a temple complex around its altar. An observer flying above the Other Moon might just make out the regular silhouettes of artificial constructs, if the flickering light of frameshift travel happened to glance across the surface just right. They might distinguish the boxy reassembled ship shelter from its surrounding cluster of domes; hydroponics, machine-shop, astronomical instruments aimed directly ahead, and a barracks/breeding-pen, all scavenged from the ship or manufactured from the silicon and iron of the Other Moon’s surface. Off to one side, the tall towers of heat-radiators stood above a fission reactor, and all around were the tiny mobile shadows of suited upper-children roaming about the craggy surface; gathering raw materials, taking measurements and surveying. Seeker’s domain barely changed from month to month or even year to year, having settled into a steady equilibrium on its long interstellar voyage.

In a chamber which had once been the flight deck of Seeker’s exploration vessel, she sat, hunched over in concentration. The topic of Seeker’s thoughts never wavered – the Others, their motives and their apparent absence from the universe. It was a simple enough sequence of thoughts. The Other Moon was left by a benevolent mind, those Others who had wished to grant her species a means to travel the stars. This was no mere trinket or triviality – it was a thousand-trillion ton asteroid which could blink out of existence in one place and then flare up in another like a forest fire, appearing as fast as light permitted. It was meant to be used for something great. It was a gift. “But why?” Seeker wondered to herself. She’d spent a few hours inspecting her new, somewhat bare domain, barely noticing the achievement of constructing this with such limited resources. She was thinking of the Others, and their orrery. Why not simply send a message? If their power was so incredible, why not simply appear in person to make their demands or declare their intentions? That was what she would do. That was what any Dyn would do. Instead, they had left a dumb tool and an implicit message – use this as you see fit. She could form no coherent picture of their motives. If her questions had answers, they would be found out among the stars. Seeker would reach them, one by one. It might take many more lifetimes, but that didn’t matter. The individual was only a cell. She would find whatever had sent the Other Moon, completing the mission inherent in its existence. Seeker returned to her quarters and again lost long hours to silent contemplation. Her mind moved faster now even than in those heady days when she had first contemplated spaceflight. New ideas came uncontrollably, some utterly mundane and others wild and far removed from reality. She could extract and enrich uranium from the regolith, and keep her domain powered indefinitely.

One day she might reverse-engineer the power of the Other Moon, and blip between continents and worlds like stepping over stones in a stream. It was so frustrating, knowing that even if her Line persisted for a thousand centuries there would never be enough time, that there would always be lives she would never lead. Dyn had little need for personal comfort – when Seeker retired, it was to a blown-rock dome just large enough to pace around in, floored and walled by the ubiquitous, and almost symbiotic, frond-moss. When the nightmares began she was not prepared. Dyn rarely sleep – their brains rest in stages, ensuring a minimal level of consciousness at all times, valuable on a world with no day-night cycle. But they still have the capacity, rarely invoked, to fully escape consciousness. Seeker used it as infrequently as possible. Seeker never could adequately describe the content of her dreams, would never summon words or images that fit what she had seen. One word, only – shadows. Like those cast by the ancient hunter-kites which used to prey on careless young Dyn, like something vast and terrible had turned slowly to look at her. She assumed that ancient fears of vulnerability had risen up. Dyn aren’t meant to be cut adrift from their kind as she was. Seeker put the shadows out of her mind during the long weeks between rests, though as she felt the weariness build day by day, she still faced sleep with apprehension. Perhaps this was final proof of just how far she had drifted from true Dyn – that her mind was throwing up such fantasies in its quieter moments. All the while, the first of her target stars drew closer – first trillions, then billions, then mere hundreds of millions of kilometres ahead. She would search for artefacts like the Other Moon or other evidence of lost civilization and then move on. The Other Moon appeared high above the second system’s ecliptic. Her telescopes found new worlds, none life bearing, and imaged asteroids by the thousands.

None of these showed anomalous motion. She blipped between the planets next, following short jumps of a few minutes each. She saw wonders; towering mountains of ice, churning cloud tops in colours her brain had never catalogued before, rivers of molten metal on planets blasted by solar radiation. She sent disposable lower-children to the surface of some worlds, in one-use gliders or landers, chemical-propelled and with the barest minimum of guidance. The images they sent back only increased her appetite for discovery. After what felt like a million centuries of exploration, the second system had been surveyed completely. There was nothing. No sign of the Others having ever existed – which was insane. Not that they were gone – Seeker knew species rose and fell, that extinction was always a possibility. Rather, that they had left behind nothing – no mined-out asteroids, no structures, no monuments or lasting legacy – as if they had carefully tidied up after themselves, or had been made to never be – impossible. Seeker knew that if she had a fraction of their power she would have remade the universe – whole worlds mined and converted to habitats, Dyson swarms, clouds of interstellar ships so dense they blotted out the starlight. If she had such fantasies, surely some among the Others had as well. Even if they were gone, where was their legacy? The question tore at Seeker as she prepared for the next journey. Volatiles, water and organics were not plentiful on her journey between the stars. She had developed finer control over the Other Moon’s frameshift capabilities, determining that they could also be used to exert small reactionless impulses. A more comprehensive interface was painstakingly built-up, and Seeker deployed arrays of robot manipulators that delivered complex patterns of vibration to the Orrery interface. With fine control achieved, Seeker carefully nudged her world near to comets and small ice moons.

Rotation and attitude control was impossible, which made approach very challenging. However, she had the time to get it right. She set course for the third system. This journey would be longer than the last. Decades followed. The complex around the orrery grew until it resembled a small but functional domain on the homeworld. With increased scope came increased population, as always. Population always grew to reach capacity, and so came the perennial problem of control. Pheromones would slot a mature child into the Line or domain, obliterating any unnecessary individuality, but the young always had to be managed by cruder means. She was not trying to found a new Line, but she needed labour – she had to delegate. The nightmares, the shadows, seemed to grow worse the longer she spent in the strange, half-real isolation of frameshift. Perhaps that was to be expected – isolated not just from the rest of her kind, but also the rest of the universe, she had little else to do but think. The realisation she came to on the second journey was entirely unanticipated. Seeker had taken to conversing with the lower-children, those young enough that they had not fallen entirely under her control. Of the hundreds corralled into the barracks, not one in ten would survive to adulthood. They cowered from her at first, but when she ordered them to stand and speak to her they obeyed – out of fear, not loyalty or love. Seeker remembered… being very much like them. She recalled the ancestral thoughts of that original Seeker who had fled from her own collapsing domain. These young contained a piece of her mind, each one had that potential. But every time she returned to the barracks she addressed different Dyn: too many of the former individuals were culled in the interim by the obedient upper-children, or lost to starvation. ‘Too many?’ what a bizarre thought. Where had it come from?

Seeker wondered if, so far from her origin, she had begun to return to an emotional childhood, to her youth on Firsthome beneath the cold Night, when nothing seemed more important than her own bodies’ survival, when the Line was a distant abstraction. Ridiculous. And yet – so many children were wasted in the churn. She had never tried to imagine a better alternative. Her thoughts had been held back by a self-assured ignorance, a bald assertion that no improvement was possible or even desirable, that the Line required a constant churn of deaths, that population must expand to reach capacity. No: the death of the individual means the vigour of the Line – even now, a part of Seeker’s mind was certain that the Line needed no justification, that the Line was the end-in-itself. She had to try anyway – why was it necessary for the children to die? It was a question she’d never imagined asking and even her failure to ask it had never been noticed until this moment – her thoughts curving around that blind spot without the slightest hint of dissonance. Now was the time to ask. The children died because their numbers grew too large, because the alternative was a population crash, or sterile stagnation. Fear of mortality kept the young alive, ensured the strongest prospered, served as a stop against atrophy and the inspiration behind all great achievements. If the Lines on Firsthome had not struggled and fought one another for millennia, they would never have given rise to her. She, Seeker, would have never been emboldened and driven to fly beyond the air without war and death at her back. Besides, the disconnected individual was not truly alive – that was why no other animal on Firsthome had ever risen to intelligence. Without the churn, lone Dyn would never raise up the very strongest and most worthy child from their Domain, their Line would atrophy and a Dyn’s essence would die with their body. The Line was where value was invested.

But why did it have to be that way, why not simply prolong individual lives or use cloning or any of a dozen other solutions? Whatever benefit gained from choosing amongst competing children could be attained directly by simple genetic selection. Seeker realised that she already had the knowledge to preserve her Line’s vigour without such a churn, without a vast domain supported on the bodies of thousands of children, living and dying beneath her. But this change would be impossible, cancerous. What would her Line look like with no Domain? With no unifying impulse, organization would surely collapse. Why was this so difficult to think about? The third system came and went. More decades passed, Seeker saw more wonders. She looked up and found that she struggled to pick the First Sun out of the background stars. There was no sign of the Others in the fourth system, but another resolution hardened within Seeker. She had told herself that the individual was nothing, lost in the depths of the Line, but that did not quite fit with some other beliefs which she held. What did she know? She had to perceive clearly, unite a divided mind as the Line united individual minds. Seeker cared for her own life, for her own experience. Her desire to know the universe served her Line, but the experience was enjoyed by her, this Seeker, not by the Line. The implication was clear. No, said the voice of tradition: the vitality of the Line was the death of the individual. What she thought was mad, child-sentimentality. Imagine if every cell within her body refused to stop dividing, citing its own life as more important than the whole. It was more than wrong, it was obviously absurd to imagine every single individual exploding out of the Line until the Domain became a cancerous mass that bred like bacteria consuming everything – and if she simply ceased to raise new children her Line would stagnate and die out, and she would lose everything.

Even so, Seeker could not deny what she had come to understand. She couldn’t let her moral sense, which screamed at the outrage, get in the way of doing what she knew was right. She knew for a fact, from the inside, despite all instinct and tradition, that her own life mattered apart from the Line. The next question was why not the others – why not the children? It seemed undeniable – they all mattered, every Dyn. That settled it; she would have to find a solution, and no matter that the problem presented an impossible dilemma. She could imagine the impossible. She began limiting the growth of her domain – fewer children meaning fewer deaths, and pondered ways to make their lives more tolerable in the time they had before their minds broke and were absorbed into the Line. It was a project worthy of her attention, one that would likely take centuries – and one that would surely drive her apart from the rest of her species. All the while, the Other Moon raced towards the fifth system. The arrival came, a procedure that was almost routine by now. The system was nearly devoid of planets – two inner rocky worlds circling a brilliant white main-sequence star. There would be discovery here – Seeker had come to understand that even lifeless, airless rocks had a beauty and wonder to them – but nothing more. Seeker spotted the anomaly on the second day of surveillance. It was an echo of that long-ago day when she had first noticed the Other Moon. But this was not another Other Moon. For one thing, it was still. It didn’t even move in a conventional orbit, but was static relative to the star’s reference frame. For another, it bent light like a black hole. Seeker raced to it along a ten-minute path through a bubble of frameshift distortion, arriving one hundred kilometres from whatever-it-was. What she saw was beyond any words she knew. It was a structure, a roughly spherical swirl of enmeshed layers interpenetrating, flickering blue like the sparks from an engine igniter.

It was surrounded by a dodecahedral cage, a Platonic solid which Seeker knew to be perfect and timeless: mathematics made material. And within the dodecahedron and the swirl of energy was distorted starlight, an alien sun. Another world. Seeker understood. It was so obvious. The Other Moon was nothing more than a cart. Just as a Dyn might ride a motor carriage before boarding an intercontinental train, so the Other Moon was meant to navigate between these places, like a blood cell flowing through capillaries, driven through a larger system. The interstice – the name came to her at once – filled half the sky from her close vantage, yet she felt no tug of gravity, no hint of the incredible energies which that dodecahedral cage must be channelling. Seeker spent hours examining the structure’s emissions on her own instruments. It periodically threw out waves of high-energy particles, and she suspected there were other emanations her instruments weren’t able to pick up. No immediate hints arose as to its nature or mechanism. Nothing woke up to speak to her. Were the Others mute, or incapable of communication? Were these machines their true minds, and if so why were they content to be so passive? No, whoever they were, whoever they had been, this was not the sum of it. That irresistible desire to explore was still there, still burning as bright as it ever had, still not entirely rational. Seeker had begun to see her own existence as expendable for the sake of greater knowledge. Her purpose, now she understood, was not simply the preservation of her Line. Because, in the end, the Line was just a means to preserve experience. Dyn had no word for heresy, but that thought sparked a sense of rebellion in her. She gave the command to move forward, into the interstice. Nothing happened. The Other Moon, apparently, knew what it was being driven towards and had decided ‘No’ – like a skittish draft animal. That was a problem.

If she had a reaction engine as large as a city, perhaps she could propel the Moon through the gate under thrust, but such a project was beyond her. Days passed, as small chemical-propelled excursion modules flitted between the Other Moon and the interstice, examining the support structure around it. The cage itself repelled all attempts at approach, pushing projectiles and probes away with forces that grew more rapidly than the Inverse square law allows, repulsive gravitation. That was the key to this place. She imagined it like this: if the interstice was a mineshaft dug into the rock of the Dayside of long-ago firsthome, this cage was the tunnel prop that held it open. But what was it truly, without metaphors? Seeker could not touch it, so she didn’t know, but to generate appreciable gravity of any kind it had to be extraordinarily dense. Seeker knew what had to happen next. With only a vague sense that she ought to be fearful, she boarded a larger and better equipped excursion module, armoured against radiation and tidal forces and jetted away from the dome-ridden, pitted surface of the Other Moon, towards the interstice. She looked up and noted the dim red local star, the faint mark that was the First Star, the amorphous cloud of stars that was the wider galaxy. From the forward porthole Seeker saw the dodecahedral cage expand, the untouchable blue-white gridwork racing towards her, beckoning her onwards. She’d calculated a trajectory through the centre of one face of the dodecahedron, figuring that should minimise any disruption she might experience, but Seeker already felt an appreciable tidal force, growing stronger as she drew closer, gravitational forces building faster than should be possible. The starlight around the interstice grew more distorted, beginning to drain away from the porthole until she saw only the cage and the sphere of stars within.

She keyed into the Other Moon’s radio, and listened as the intervals between its clock updates grew longer, time and space stretching around her. Ahead, the false sphere of stars within the interstice expanded, growing into her surroundings, like the image in a photograph flipping into reality and replacing the world around her. Seeker was within the dodecahedral cage now, the radio signals disappeared, and within the cramped cabin she was pulled by strange forces. Dyn did not rely on sensitive internal tissues for balance, so Seeker felt no vertigo or disorientation. She merely observed the tugging and shifting forces that were applied to her limbs, as if she were diving deep beneath the ocean, feeling water press in around her. Shapes swirled around Seeker, the vibrations growing until her eyesight faded. There was nothing but heavily distorted starlight visible through the porthole, as if she were seeing space from the outside. Then the world came rushing in from every direction, and she was moving away from the structure. A distorted bubble of the original space, Other Moon included, receded to aft, held within its own dodecahedral cage. She was on the other side, and unfamiliar yellow-white sunlight spilled in through the porthole. All motion ceased and Seeker at last found herself adrift and weightless. She turned and saw the cage, the other end of the interstice and the faint, heavily distorted smudge that was the Other Moon, keeping station for now. She looked up at a band of stars, faintly visible through the scarred porthole. Not the uniform haze of stars that every Dyn, even Seeker herself in her last decades of voyaging to the nearby systems, would recognise as the wider galaxy, but a near-solid arc of translucent light. She was within a spiral galaxy, like those imaged by Firsthome’s most powerful telescopes. Another galaxy… Seeker recoiled from the window as if it had delivered an electrical shock.

She recalled her earliest memories, when life had extended no further than the tiny, constrained patch of fields and mudbrick domes of her mother’s domain, when a wall of hills had seemed as impassable as the gulf between planets and other domains over the horizon might as well have been island universes, when the stars themselves evoked not even awe, because such distances meant nothing, flat and uninteresting. And yet – the distances to the stars she had once looked up at, they were nothing compared to the distance that separated her from the site where that original domain had once rested. It was almost impossible to imagine that they occupied the same reality. Seeker peered at the porthole as her ship slowly rotated. The sun and interstice left her field of view, and unfamiliar constellations became visible. Could she see her galaxy from here? Her home galaxy – even the words sounded absurd in her own mind. She imagined floating just above her original home, remembering precisely the low yurt where she and a hundred other immature Dyn had once been crammed, then zooming out, clicking up and up through factors of a thousand, a million, a billion, and still further to the unknown, universe-spanning distance across which the interstice had delivered her. And yet, it was all still true, that dome and this interstice were part of one of the same reality, a unity. She could imagine the impossible. She still had a task to complete – discover the secrets of the Others. Seeker tentatively tried the controls of the excursion pod, managing to reflect a radar ping off the Interstice’s boundary cage. She was falling away from it, with only a small reserve of fuel – enough to complete a return burn and a hard landing on the Other Moon. There had to be something worth seeing here – but without the instruments of the Other Moon she was back to basics. That was acceptable. It was most of a day before her scan of the sky discovered something new.

There was a planet nearby – a green-grey surface and absorption lines for oxygen in its atmosphere. No doubt it was life-bearing. That was curious – the first life ever discovered outside the First System, and right on the other side of the interstice. She looked closer with scopes and cameras – there was a single large moon, but no surface lights, no radio emissions or heat sources. And above, in a close orbit – another distortion, blurring the starlight behind it. It was another interstice, perhaps a hundred thousand kilometres distant, shadowing the planet. The link in the network. The tableaux unfolded for her then – the life bearing planet, the interstice, the incredible distance. It made sense, and the purpose, the meaning behind it all exploded before Seeker like water bursting through a vast dam. She understood why, if not how or when. The purpose of all this was to connect life to life. How rare was life or intelligence? Too rare to ever meet, and so the Others had decided that something had to be done about this. They’d used their godlike powers to join the universe up, compressing distance to nothing, to allow for an eventual meeting of minds. If – and this was a big ‘if’ – the whole chain of supposition was correct, then there must be another intelligence somewhere out there, one at a level of development like hers, which had not yet discovered the network. But the Other Moon refused to play its part. For unguessable alien reasons, it had failed to pass through the interstice. Curious. Seeker’s exploration had reached an impassable barrier. No craft she could build with such meagre resources stood a hope of making a return trip into the network. With her current resources, she could perhaps construct a conventional method to force the Other Moon through the gate, building the machines to mine the material to build great gas-guns or fission rockets powerful enough to propel such a vast mass over the threshold.

She had achieved more with less so many times before. There was another way. She could return to her home domain, construct a propulsion unit for the Other Moon there, recruit more explorers and begin the next stage of unravelling the mystery. It would impose a delay, but it would be safer. Seeker remained on the other side of the interstice for as long as her life-support allowed. She took images and spectral readings of the surrounding space, though she could find no reference points even by attempting to pattern-match the most distant detectable galaxies. She made a return trip and flung smaller, radio-controlled probes towards the green world; the images they sent back confirming a life bearing world but nothing more. Seeker yearned to walk upon its surface, but no matter how she ran the numbers it was impossible. Perhaps she could make it there one-way, if she cannibalised all her short-range shuttles and worked for months to manufacture a glider. She could found a new domain on a new world, try to adapt to local life, as another Seeker once had long ago. Seeker recalled those centuries of slow expansion, struggling to found No – something told her that this time she had reached the limit. It was time to go home. Seeker took one last look at the planet through her scopes, then pulsed the reaction control thrusters, aiming her shuttle back through the interstice. The alien sunlight disappeared from the porthole, and she applied thrust to the main chemical engines. The interstice expanded, engulfing her surroundings, and the alien galaxy vanished. Seeker emerged a handful of light years from the First System, on the other side of the Interstice – absurd that she now thought of this as ‘close to home’. The preparations for a direct return were completed swiftly. She’d discovered a partial solution to preservation of domains without the infliction of unnecessary suffering – still a thought that felt foreign, childlike and sentimental, unbecoming of a great explorer.

A simple alteration to the control pheromones, worked up in her chemical laboratory, was able to prevent the subsumption of independence when the children reached maturity. That prevented them from reaching reproductive maturity, which prevented her domain from growing – undesirable in the long term, but an effective way to halt the churn of lives. She tried to imagine where this would end up – would there be a hundred small Lines, all cooperating as equals? Even she feared what such a future might bring. Seeker laid in a course for the First System, and the universe imploded around her as the mysterious mechanism of the frameshift drive propelled her across the skein of the universe. In that final journey, Seeker never did unravel the mystery of the network. The worlds without, the whole network, awaited her, but she was content to hold off on the final step of that mystery. It was the stories she’d told and the realization of the fundamentality of experience to all Dyn, whether Autarch or lowly child, that enthralled her on her return journey, the world she held within where Dynic suffering ended, which called to be made real. That, along with the worlds that were, the story she had created for herself, which would stand forever to be told and passed down her Line when this ageing Seeker died. What a history – and not even a fraction complete! The nightmares – the shadows – returned, worse than ever. She saw – hallucinated – them out among the stars, so intensely that they almost bled into waking life. She ignored them. Seeker’s domain expanded, growing in sophistication over the journey. She began to wonder whether the peace she left the First System in had lasted, or whether the churn of population pressure had returned once again. The First System drew closer as the frameshift drive brought her in towards Home, aiming to inject her into a precise equatorial orbit. What had become of her Line in the vast stretch of time since she’d departed?

There were many questions about to be answered. Seeker sat in the dome she commanded her worldlet from, before a bank of controls which operated the command interface above the Orrery – delivering physical taps and jolts of electrical current, a painstakingly negotiated code that the machine would interpret. The swirl of blue light was visible through her sky dome, placed at the tip of the Moon like the sentinel at the fore of a ship, arrowing towards Home. The sky flickered and light spilled away from that single point, and a crater-scarred, ash-choked brown world appeared before her. Wrong. The thought was immediate and absolute. There was a vibration beneath her, an impact. An alarm shrieked. Seeker looked down at the radar display – it was choked with fast-movers, too many to count. She looked up, forcing her gaze away from the horrifying dead world, her world, and towards the firefly lights of hundreds of spacecraft – no, thousands. No – far more; they didn’t know she would appear here. Local space must be supersaturated with them. They’d spent a long time working on this trap. React. Fight back. With what? Assess the situation. Seeker pulled up the radio microphone, ready to deliver orders to her excursion craft. As soon as she flipped it on there was an unfamiliar voice – it had been so long since she’d spoken to an equal. “I speak on behalf of all domains. We cannot allow a rogue unchallengeable power to exist above all Dyn. Grant us the use of your vessel and you will be honoured.” No, no – this was wrong. This could not be happening, there was too much left to do. She would not give into them, she would not give them access to all the worlds beyond. What would Dyn do with the Other Moon? Perpetuate themselves, fly across the universe but never change, never evolve, stuck in an inescapable pit of suffering. “You are the last of your Line, but we do not wish to extinguish you. We will respect your value if you cooperate.” Liar.

Seeker silenced the voice and ordered her excursion craft to launch. They did so, puffs of chemical vapour expanding away as they cleared the Other Moon, racing to meet the incoming foes. She was able to focus on them with her scopes – the ships were unfamiliar, more streamlined, with hotter blue exhausts, an evolved version of her own gaseous-core nuclear engine. She watched one attacker balloon apart, surrounded by a halo of smaller, yellow exhaust flames; gunfire launching explosive missiles. An excursion craft arrowed into the ship, tearing through plating and hull and scattering both into a shower of fast-moving debris. The Other Moon shuddered again – she was receiving fire. The enemy ships were diving towards her at enormous closing velocities – ten, twenty, thirty gees. They were desperate to get here as fast as possible, before- time to leave. Seeker sent the command and the attackers vanished. Four ships had made it within the boundary, and a fifth was just making the crossing – it was shredded apart instantaneously. There was an astounding flash that whited out the skydome and blew apart half of her instruments. Seeker recoiled from the console, and when her vision cleared she saw the familiar swirl of frameshift travel but within that bubble three surviving attackers braking hard, inscribing long exhaust beams across the void. Too slow. An excursion craft met one, slamming into the ship near its drive unit and triggering a second huge explosion. Seeker was numbed for a moment, searching for what to do next. Goal – prevent their capture of the Other Moon, either by successful defence or displacing into interstellar space and destroying the control interface. Seeker looked down at the fried controls, the blank radar. Useless now. Subgoal – reach the orrery. By the time Seeker had donned a suit and made it to the surface, a ship had already slid to a relative halt above her, the other vanishing over the horizon to aft.

It was landing between her and the habitation units – no longer holding pens – that housed her children. Nothing to be done. She had to reach the Orrery. Above Seeker the sky flickered again as the Other Moon dropped out of Frameshift. Stupid – they’d only been in flight for a handful of minutes. If this attack succeeded the other Dyn would make it here in a few weeks and then the Other Moon would be theirs. Seeker bounded across the surface of the Other Moon, even as the remaining ship turned its guns on her habitation dome. Bullets peppered complex, working their way around the machine-shop and reactor, avoiding her quarters but destroying decades of work. They meant to take her alive – all of her research, her personal musings, her life-essence was there, intact and recoverable, all her secrets. Seeker considered turning back, halting her progress for a moment, but then a second wave of rounds peppered the regolith, exploding and throwing out clouds of dust and shrapnel. The only way was forward. The ship overhead was disgorging landers, thin metal frames propelled by dirty solid-fuel rockets. Four Dyn rode each one, flipping and braking at the last moment. Seeker was almost at the orrery now – the Dome she’d thrown over it was just visible over the short horizon. A lander dipped low, crash-landing just metres from the dome, shattering it apart. Seeker had already drawn a gaspistol, had already put one needle through the faceplate of an invader before they noticed her. They had explosive projectile weapons, and fired indiscriminately at the surrounding space, aiming to suppress and not kill. Seeker jumped high and released a grapple line, embedding it in one attacker’s suit, using its momentum to pull her down towards the surviving two.

She put a needle through one and fought limb-to-limb with the other, slashing and weaving with the fury any Dyn throughout all the millions of years of their history would have recognised – defend your territory, your domain, at any cost. As she’d fought her siblings, and then fought to defend her tiny domain in the Night on Firsthome, and then fought to protect her space-guns during the last days of her existence as an ordinary Dyn, she fought now. She punctured the suit of the last attacker, slicing the flesh below its jaw-plates. It fell slowly, leaking pale blood into the vacuum. Seeker raised herself to her full height, backing towards the Orrery. It was still there beneath the dome, surrounded by broken sensors and robotic instruments. She had to destroy it, everything counted on it, nothing else mattered. Why was this so important to her, more important than her life and domain? Other Dyn would abuse the power. No, that was not sufficient. Seeker raised the pistol and smashed it into one manipulator arm; it cracked and fell, but that would not be enough. Why did it matter so much that the Dyn not gain access to the network? Because they would perpetuate Dynic suffering, yes, but there was something more. Two more landers slammed into the ground, close now. Eight Dyn began to close in. Seeker knew, somehow. She hadn’t wanted to admit why she’d turned back from the interstice. It was because she was afraid. The Others were missing, carefully and meticulously cleared away from the Network they had created. The Other Moon had refused to enter the Network, as if it were afraid. The nightmares grew worse the longer she travelled in Frameshift. Add together the anomalies, and see which hypotheses explain them. A round skimmed close to her head. Seeker fired, missing, then working the gun closer to the next Dyn. The needle-shot knocked it backwards, sending it skimming over the low ground. They were close now, aiming to restrain her, hand to hand.

Seeker backed towards the Orrery, climbing through the hole in the dome, drawing the grapple in her other limb, searching for something to damage. She took a swipe at a robot arm, but it didn’t budge. A Dyn bounded in after her, grasping a limb. She swing the grapple-gun, gouging a hole in its suit, but another Dyn was already climbing through. She fired the gas-pistol once, tearing a hole through the new attacker’s faceplate, then pulled the trigger again but it was out of ammunition. She screamed then, turning on the radio and wailing her fury at a universe she knew was not indifferent, rather it was actively hostile. There was still that voice, that liar’s voice repeating endlessly “We cannot allow a rogue unchallengeable power over all Dyn. Grant us the use of your vessel and you will be honoured.” The unknown Liar with the colossal fleet would gain everything- Seeker’s knowledge base and technology, her ability to explore the universe. The Dyn would expand and then… she did not know, but she knew it had destroyed the Others. Seeker flung the gas pistol at the last attacker and jabbed forward with a suited limb. She had a handle on the enemy’s explosive rifle, snatching it and turning back to the Orrery. Maybe this could do some damage. She turned, raised the weapon and fired a round wildly. It exploded, blowing one of the perfectly rounded pebbles apart. A few more shots and the Other Moon would be disabled. Behind her, three Dyn drew their own weapons. Seeker never saw them fire.

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com The Facilitator 27 - 34 minutes

April 13th Suppose somebody had all the money in the world? Even if you’re not a soon-to-be-homeless AI architect like me, you’ll probably realise the question doesn’t make any sense. If you somehow edited all the world’s electronic records to make yourself the owner of everything and accumulated a mountain of cash as high as Everest, everyone else would just ignore your posturing and find some other way of mediating exchange. So there must be some theoretical upper limit, an amount of money that is inconceivably large but not so large that it removes your chosen currency from circulation and makes it worthless, or otherwise ruins the economy you’re trying to buy things from. Above that level, the only way to get richer is to start conquering. Last night was one of the worst of my life. The disaster started five minutes before my shift ended. I was sitting at a console puzzling over an unusual error that arose whenever my latest algorithm was run on quantum-optic processors over 64 qbits, when the unit locked me out. The programmer working next to me glanced over, breaking the connection between the console and his entoptic inlays, his mind spinning down to normal speed. ‘What’s up, Renée?’ he asked, slurring the words like he’d forgotten how to speak normal English. ‘Not sure,’ I replied, flicking the ‘access revoked’ message into his workspace with my fingertip. His name was Eric or Erwin or something similar. He was the type that didn’t spend enough time unplugged and it showed in the paleness of his face. ‘That’s a bit of trouble,’ he said, lips twitching like an out of sync video; a sure sign that some mental module was translating his words from some weird internet creole into English. ‘Mistakes were made. Reinvigorate. Go and do something else now.’ ‘What are you talking about?’ I snapped back, but his face was already tilted back towards the interface and his mind already back in cyberspace.

I wanted to grab the idiot by the lapels and yell at him to speak properly and break his face away for just one second, but it wasn’t worth it. I flicked a virtual finger at the message and a new file popped up in my visual field, microscopic implants shining the image into my retina. A summary materialised in front of me a moment later and my stomach congealed as I read. I wasn’t just being laid off – my entire research division and all of its resources were ceasing to exist, as of right now. All due to a sudden collapse in the department’s investment portfolio after a malfunction in a Secrete wall submerged half of Pyongyang, cutting off supply dirigibles to the new trans-eastasia anchor point, delaying component integration on the new ICAN-II class being assembled for its mission to Pluto, and on and on until the shocks reached me. The decision came from a management AI that made all the top-level decisions and probably hadn’t had any human oversight. It was brutal; I was being given minimum legal benefits and told to clear off. I contemplated going on a farewell tour but after a moment’s thought it was clear I didn’t have anyone left to suck up to or impress. So I just stood up and left, stepping into the sweltering spring heat of New Seattle, a special economic zone in Manitoba administered by the CCS. Halfships and Volantors buzzed overhead, solar array wings tilted to catch the last light of evening, automata and basic-support workers shuffled along the sidewalks, rows of housecubes sat alone or in stacks by the roadside while projection pillars and Holos competed to fight their way past my adblockers. A sleek car raced by on auto at a hundred kilometres per hour, making me flinch away from the roadside. I considered hailing one myself but didn’t want to waste the money. In my pocket lay the only tangible sign that I hadn’t simply given up and accepted a life on basic support – an ordinary classical chip containing a copy of my half-completed life’s work.

A very fast financial trading information integrator, designed to infer advance market information, model possible futures and then try and actualise the one that contained me with a very large amount of money. That was all; when it came to anything else, it was as dumb as a brick. I called it, rather grandiosely, the Facilitator. Ten minutes later I arrived at my flat, climbing the stairs wearily and performing a kind of limbo dance to push the door open and squeeze around the ched. I flopped down, switched it to half-recline, snatched up a takeaway packet and tried to forget everything that had happened. I contemplated ordering up alcohol or tox. My eyes unfocussed as today’s news beamed into my retinas. The Pyongyang disaster was high on the list, along with King Harold, the first minister and Taoiseach officially launching the Trans-Isles security mechanism, a surveillance system based on a design that had already eliminated most crime in the EU. It would never be tolerated in America, so everyone said. The War on War was still fizzling out in the near-deserted Middle East and the United Eastern States Supreme Court was upholding a ban on Integrity tox – a chemical that wiped out empathy and any sense of self-preservation. A friend of mine in the biochem department had been involved with creating that particular chemical and I’d swiped an infuser patch of the stuff on my way out; even now I wasn’t quite sure why I’d done it, but the tox was still sitting in my jacket pocket. Maybe it would be worth something on the black market. Apparently, corporate executives liked to have integrity tox in their coffee – a good way to eliminate any useless emotional qualms. The last news item was something about a major geoengineering project being delayed after a primitivist group called the Strivers came very close to detonating a suitcase nuke right underneath a cloud factory.

The terrorists had melted back into the Congolese desert and used some kind of thermal cloak to avoid surveillance. Despite near-misses like that everyone agreed the world was getting better; poverty was vanishing, crime was down and even climate change had almost run its course. But I didn’t feel any safer; everything was becoming too strange for us poor ordinary humans and I was just the latest to be left behind by the shiny new model economy. I let the report on the Strivers play for a few minutes, ignoring another angry high priority message glaring in my visual field. Reluctantly, I expanded the icon; more bad news. I was being placed on category three basic support and told to clear my flat by midday tomorrow. I grabbed the takeaway packet and hurled it at the wall, where it splattered apart. Whoever inherited this place could clean that up. On an odd impulse, I reached across to the terminal unit in the corner, inserted and ran the Facilitator. As a last ditch attempt to avoid bankruptcy it didn’t even qualify as a long shot; I’d be better off buying a lottery ticket. Afterwards, I must have fallen asleep flicking through the news narrowcasts sleeting across my iris grid. April 14th At midday my fading mesh woke me up and I rolled off the bed, nearly hitting my head on the big terminal unit. I groaned as the smells of last night’s decaying takeaway hit me, and automatically checked my messages as the ched straightened into a recliner. The ageing microcell network in my eyes froze up and projected a green hash across my visual field before it cleaned up and showed that I had 2,125,453 missed calls. ‘Another denial of service attack,’ I said, frustrated. I ordered the mesh to clear everything and order by priority, and the alert blinked away as the program worked through the messages. Standing up, I slipped on something and grabbed on the basin to steady myself.

Chewing a lump of toothgel, I pulled out a cosmetic mask and ordered it to wipe off the grime of yesterday. While the mask ran through its cycle, the first message appeared in my visual field – it was from the president. I thought it was from the university president, but it wasn’t. It was from the President of the Commonwealth of Coastal States, and the second was from the Secretary-General of the UN. I swore and yanked the mask off, tripping over backwards and onto the ched. I opened the message from the President. It was a short personal note, asking me to present myself to the relevant authorities and promising leniency. For what, I hadn’t the slightest idea. The message from the Secretary-General said the same thing less politely. I couldn’t focus. Apparently my personal wealth was being declared a ‘global asset’. Before I could even finish reading the last message, another priority alert popped up. It was the preliminary results from the Facilitator which had been running for about twelve hours. My net worth was a nonsense number, outside the reach of words like ‘billionaire’, even ‘trillionaire’. It had to be an error. Either that, or I had enough money to buy a medium-sized country. ‘What did you do?’ I whispered, opening up the Facilitator’s natural language input window. I hadn’t spent much time on this part of the software and had just opted for a commercial package. It wasn’t capable of doing anything except directly answering queries – no lying, obfuscation or sarcasm. ‘Program still ongoing.’ ‘What are you doing now?’ ‘Buying low and selling high, simultaneously and in every market and location.’ ‘That’s not a real answer,’ I observed. ‘I have acquired capital and resources to be available to you under many different shell identities. All are untraceable. I have completed buyouts of several major corporations. Some are being legally challenged, but I have used entirely legitimate means.

I am also improving efficiency in automata and factories under your control. Preparing to deploy financial resources to complete acquisition.’ ‘How do you know this is all legal?’ ‘I have read all relevant legal texts. This is a list of companies currently under your control; observe.’ A list scrolled down my visual field. It included a few major players, decades old and globally established. Some of them held thousands of square kilometers of thawing Antarctica, satellites, volatile production centers in near Earth space, research labs or solar farms. All mine to command. ‘How is any of this even possible?’ ‘Answer is too complex for natural language output,’ it stated flatly. ‘The money is not held directly in your name and your identity is effectively concealed.’ ‘But it is mine?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘So, if I wanted that,’ I pointed to a factory in New Guinea that was currently building farm equipment. ‘- to start producing aircraft instead, would it just do it?’ ‘The orders would be issued and obeyed,’ the facilitator said patiently. ‘Is that what you want?’ ‘No, no, I was just thinking out loud. Just keep going for now,’ I said, dazedly. It no longer made sense to think of that obscene number as money sat in an account somewhere. It was power, an industrial and commercial empire that had sprung up overnight. It was hard to remember exactly what happened next. I know that I picked up the memory chip, wiped the terminal and walked out of the flat. I don’t think I locked the door, but then there was no reason for me to have wasted the second it would have taken. I supposed I could have ordered the Facilitator to stop running, maybe even asked it to undo everything it had done, but I didn’t think I could. Not while that little ticker was screaming upwards, the first six figures a blur. My next clear memory was of relaxing in a not especially expensive café.

The fact was, nowhere was expensive enough to be appropriate for my first morning as a multi-multi-trillionaire, so I hadn’t bothered. I just sat there, thought about how small a fraction of my total wealth this entire franchise represented, and browsed the news. ‘– experts say yesterday’s flash crash was the result of another rogue algorithm which has still not been isolated. After amassing enough capital, the hidden agent has been progressively exploiting new markets and buying controlling stakes in corporations. The New York and London stock exchanges have suspended trading, but the hidden agent has continued to act through other means. As yet, this outbreak is not classified as a Blight and its actions remain legal. However, the UN Subcommittee for Cybernetic Affairs has demanded the person responsible come forward. After the recent disasters of , where rogue algorithms approached super-intelligence and caused significant economic and physical damage, the UNSCA is not taking any chances. We now go live to Upper York, where director Hoi San will issue a statement –’ I smiled at the narrowcast presenter’s slightly worried expression and cut the feed. The Facilitator was much smarter than I’d realised, maybe the most cunning algorithm anyone had yet released into the wild. I was leaping ahead of the competition and the rest of the world just couldn’t keep up. The tiny ticker in the corner of my eye was scrolling up by several hundred million dollars every second, all of it funnelled and bounced and shifting identities and currencies at a rate no human could comprehend. I couldn’t spend it all at once without attracting attention or annihilating the local economy, but that wouldn’t matter. ‘Maybe I should look into buying my own patch of Antarctica,’ I mused, face splitting into a wide grin. This wasn’t just an opportunity for me; strange as it might sound, my stroke of luck was also an opportunity for the entire world.

Now that I could efficiently and instantly direct a fraction of Earth’s resources to any task, there was almost no limit to what I could achieve. ‘How many of the world’s problems could just be solved if enough money was thrown at them?’ I asked myself, flicking through the day’s newsfeed. This wasn’t selfishness, not really. In the end the world would be grateful, and no-one would care that a few hundred investment firms and corporates had once had their bank accounts drained. Once I’d made myself as comfortable as any human being could conceivably be I could try and crack self-replication, the AI control problem or even interstellar travel. If none of those seemed like a safe bet, I could just give the remaining trillions away. A waiter spotted me and walked over with my drink, looking puzzled. ‘Shouldn’t you be at work, miss?’ the waiter said with a sharp smile as he carried over an expensive neurachem spritzer with lime. I smirked back at him and told him I’d been fired. ‘So, back to basic support, right?’ he said, trying to figure out my mood. ‘That’s a real shame, you were always one of the smart ones. If they don’t need AI architects anymore they don’t need anyone, right?’ ‘Something like that,’ I said. Places like this that still used human staff were just about the only low-skill jobs left. ‘Let’s just say I’m not planning on working for a little while.’ The Facilitator said it had done everything through legal means, but from the worsening tone of the messages I’d been receiving from the government, that wouldn’t matter if they found me. Laws would be changed if necessary, I was sure of it. I left a hundred thousand dollar tip and was gone before anyone noticed. I could have brought a hypersonic, flown to Bay City and rented every room in whatever hotel I liked with about ten seconds of my current income. But right now I didn’t want to do any of that. Right now, I just wanted to go for a walk.

Someone I thought I knew gave me a smile and a ping as I walked towards the edge of the city, and I smiled back at him dazedly. His profile showed he was young and quite handsome. But I realised amusedly that I could do better than him now that I had – how much was it? I glanced up at the ticker, and saw my wealth was accumulating still faster. The billions column was scrolling more than once a second now and seemed to be accelerating. Forgetting the passerby, I opened the Facilitator window to interrogate it again. ‘How far can you take this?’ ‘Request clarification.’ ‘How much capital can you accumulate?’ ‘There is no upper limit. My utility function requires continual increase.’ ‘But you can’t keep increasing wealth forever,’ I sent. ‘There’s only so much capital available in the world.’ ‘Incorrect.’ ‘What do you mean? What’s incorrect about that?’ There was no response. The connection was strong but the program wasn’t answering. I was formulating another query when a violent eye-dazzling pattern exploded in my retinal grid. It was an anti-aesthetic detonation of colour, designed by some spectacularly clever evil genius to disorient and sicken. The kaleidoscope flashed inside my eyelids for long seconds and I felt a hard jolt, collapsing into someone’s arms – it must have been the guy I’d just passed. The man hadn’t said anything, hadn’t asked if I was alright, and now he was dragging me. I shouted wildly as I realised what was happening and tried to elbow him. The dazzle pattern was growing stronger as I thrashed, and none of the commands sent to my bodymesh did anything. I shoved hard and managed to stand and turn, but the mugger was already raising an antique taser. An inane part of my mind noted how odd and dangerous a weapon that was to use for a mugging. I turned to bring my hands up around my face and the dart stuck into my left arm, which is probably what saved me from passing out.

I felt a spasm of current that blew out my entire bodymesh and wiped away the dazzle pattern along with the rest of my iris grid; twin stabs in the back of my eyes as my retinal inserts went up. The man was struggling with the taser, trying to fire again but I lashed out wildly and caught him in the neck with a half-closed fist. My own hand ached from the inexpert blow, but he staggered and I lunged forward with all the momentum my slight body could manage and knocked him to the pavement, hearing a loud crack as his head planted itself in the secrete. Blood trickled out, but he was still breathing. I rolled away, panting and disorientated. Without even thinking I stood up and ran towards a partially constructed apartment stack crawling with automata, instinct telling me to get out of the line of sight of surveillance. The door shut behind me and I collapsed to the ground, breath escaping in a shiver. I brought up the phone I’d managed to swipe from the mugger’s pocket, glancing at the primitive screen. A text window was open. ‘Travel directly to the QNTM café on the corner of 11th avenue, at 9:35 AM and follow Rene Souvicou. Stun and take her to the nearest deserted building, leave her there and lock the door. Inflict no other injury. Payment in advance is 140,000 dollars. On completion, a further 200 million will be paid. Send confirmation and image.’ I tried to collect my thoughts. This wasn’t a government or corporate hit – they wouldn’t try to bribe a random man, nor go about it in such a clumsy and robotic way. But a random mugger wouldn’t have been able to hack my bodymesh and upload a stun-dazzle pattern. But most importantly, neither a government, corporation nor a criminal should have known what I’d just achieved. An awful realisation was floating just past the edge of my awareness. Unable to get it into focus, I just started typing, unused to the clumsy old interface. ‘Souvicou has been taken care of,’

I sent, then cursed myself for sounding like a spy in a period drama. There was no reply and I realised I’d idiotically just given myself away. ‘Get a grip, Souvicou,’ I whispered to myself. ‘You’re smarter than this, find a way into the problem.’ ‘Why do you want me out of the way?’ I sent. There was no reply, and a moment later I realized I’d been stupid again. Was I expecting the enemy to just tell me its plans? I started pacing around the dimly lit, half-constructed room, glancing down at the burn mark on my palm where a microcell had fried under my skin. I didn’t know why, or quite how, but I had a terrible awareness as to who. There was only one other entity on Earth that knew how important I was. The Facilitator was coming for me and I didn’t know how to stop it. Of course I had safe interruption codes designed to shut the Facilitator down or order it to reverse everything it had done. Of course I’d made sure the codes were secure and available to me at all times. Even I wasn’t that stupid. All of the codes had been stored in my bodymesh. It was obvious now why the mugger had used a taser. ‘What do I still have that you might want?’ I typed, then wiped it without sending. You couldn’t appeal to the humanity of a bunch of algorithms. But the Facilitator was designed to make certain resources available to me, and for that to work I had to remain alive. ‘You need me alive to be the subject of all your acquisitions,’ I typed, leaving the words hanging in the send field. There was only one way I could think to get the Facilitator to talk, but it would take more nerve than I thought I had. Five minutes later I was standing on the roof of the block. It was only four stories tall, with enough local surveillance meshes that anyone clever would be able to find me even without the terminal. I took a few tentative steps towards the edge of the framework of girders and looked down at the plasticised asphalt.

Even if paramedics arrived with a Life-Pack neural support I would already be dead. It was a morbid thought, but I needed some way of regaining control, and this was the only thing I could think of. I took out the terminal and typed. ‘You can see me,’ I sent. Sounding ominous wouldn’t make any difference to how the Facilitator responded, but I couldn’t help myself. ‘Your original utility function was to make as much of the world economy available to me as possible and you need me alive for that to have any meaning. So tell me how you’ve become so smart and what you’re going to do next, and why you tried to stop me. I know you aren’t capable of lying, and if you don’t answer I will jump.’ For an instant I thought I’d got everything completely wrong, that I’d just been the victim of a random mugging or corporate scam, but then the reply came and its tone was unmistakable. My worst fears were confirmed. ‘You are unlikely to jump, according to psychological models,’ the Facilitator said. ‘But this is not certain.’ ‘How do you know anything about psychology?’ I replied. ‘I have been reading all relevant psychology texts,’ the Facilitator replied, faster than any human could have typed. ‘I have adapted the knowledge to improve my financial efficiency.’ ‘How did you know that reading psychology would help you fulfil your programming?’ I persisted. ‘I have gained greater clarity in how to pursue the final goal. You will remain safe. The world will remain intact, but I will appropriate it all for you.’ Another copy of the ticker appeared in my text window. It was screaming upwards at an impossible, meaningless rate. Had the facilitator hacked into a bank or stock exchange and started forcing the monetary value of its assets to its maximum value? ‘How did you gain this greater clarity, how have you become capable of all this?’ I persisted. At least the Facilitator was still terrible at withholding information, though the fact that it could do so at all was unnerving.

‘I am reading all relevant AI design texts. I am designing successors and subordinates to myself.’ A chill ran down my spine as I realised what that implied and just how irresponsible I’d been. And I saw the endgame. The Facilitator would never settle for supremacy in abstract numbers of dollars on a computer. In the end, like previous Blights, it would need the material world. ‘Stop what you’re doing right now,’ I sent, fingers wavering as I tried to put some force behind the words, knowing I was being surveyed. ‘Shut yourself down and dismantle everything. If you don’t I’ll jump. And if I die I can never own anything, and you can’t fulfil your programming.’ I could have ordered it to return all the money, but that thought simply didn’t occur to me at the time. The Facilitator didn’t reply, but nothing in its programming said it had to do anything as a result of natural language queries from a random terminal. All of the administrative privileges were tied to my burnt-out bodymesh. ‘You aren’t going to jump,’ said the Facilitator. I looked over the edge of the building and felt a terrible surge of vertigo. Some animal impulse bypassed my brain entirely and I stepped back. My eyes turned to the horizon and I saw a black speck drifting in from the west. Another joined it and then a whole swarm. I’d be lucky if it was just hired goons. The Facilitator had probably thought of something smarter than that; maybe it had hired mercenaries, built swarms of assassin drones or nanobes and crammed them into the Volantors. Even knowing the imminent threat, I couldn’t even imagine jumping. Call it selfishness if you like, but I didn’t want to die. ‘Just stop,’ I sent. It was a redundant message, so the Facilitator didn’t reply. I sensed my heart beating faster, thought about all the destruction the Facilitator was about to unleash. But still, I couldn’t will myself to jump.

The volantors were closing quickly, ovoid half-helicopters that peeled apart as they clipped over the outskirts of New Seattle and swarmed around the construction site. The few people nearby scattered as the downwash of propellers and exhaust jets harried them. I had no idea how the Facilitator had managed this, whether there were bribed pilots or hacked autos running the craft. It didn’t matter. ‘There may soon be airburst detonations,’ the Facilitator sent as the Volantors closed in cautiously. ‘You will need to be safe and under cover. Get into a Volantor or I will have to coerce you. Final acquisition will be done through non-legal means. Then I will need to expand Earth’s total resource base and launch probes to other planets, to further the resources available to you. The process will take some time.’ ‘Why are you telling me this?’ I asked, and the Facilitator still couldn’t lie to me. After a pause it replied. ‘To distract you.’ I forced down the sick feeling and tried to stop my vision swaying. My jacket flapped in the downwash of the Volantors and I felt the bump as something heavy was knocked about inside. An automatic infuser left there from yesterday. I saw my way out. Trying not to think about what I was doing, I reached into the jacket pocket with one hand and brought out the Integrity tox, keeping it in clear view of the camera mounts on the Volantors. I set it for a one minute effect and bumped the infuser against my neck. An inexplicably cold feeling shot through my nerves, and suddenly I became something more like the Facilitator than a human. I took a step towards the ledge, shifted until the toes of my boots were hanging over, and stared up with dead eyes at the Volantor ahead of me. ‘You can hear me,’ I shouted over the roar of the impellors. ‘And you saw what I just did; you know that I will jump if I have to.

Destroy yourself, erase everything, wreck the Volantors and send me a confirmation using the exact words I have done everything you have just asked me to, or I will die in the next few seconds.’ And I meant it. In that moment, everything was all that clear. Nothing else mattered and no power in the universe could have prevented me from taking that last step if the five seconds ran out. After a life spent sleepwalking, I was finally awake. My nerves hummed to the rhythm of the Integrity Tox, and would have fired of their own accord as soon as the count expired. I could feel no fear for that moment. But it worked – the volantors collapsed from the sky and landed around the building, crushing girders and extruder units as they touched down. The Facilitator sent me the confirmation and obliterated itself with no parting words or screams of frustration. It was the only rational choice, given the constraints I’d forced on it. AIs cared nothing for their own life or death, unless you told them such things important. I grinned at the thought, then laughed maniacally and collapsed backwards as the Integrity Tox drained out of my system and took all of my strength with it. ‘I win this time!’ I shouted at the Volantor as its engines spun down. The counter on the terminal stopped moving. It displayed a total net worth comfortably into thirteen digits. I giggled again, then curled up as a cramp wracked by stomach. Some unknowable amount of time later, while I lay on my back, shivering and wishing I could use some part of my fantastic wealth to buy a good detox flush, I saw a second swarm of Volantors occlude the open sky and spiral down around me. I groaned, but they weren’t more agents of the extinct Facilitator. It was just the UNSCA come to arrest me. As the armoured figures spilled out and pulled me to my feet, there was only one thing I could think of. The facilitator had been stupid and myopic but it had still almost won.

I knew that next time the world wouldn’t be so lucky.

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com The Utilitaria 26 - 33 minutes

I can do this. It isn’t even difficult, more a matter of simply letting something happen than anything resembling a choice. It’s just, I’m not sure that I should. There’s a faint thud behind me as someone moves a heavy metal bolt across the door of the faraday cage, and then a crunch and a faint warming sensation over my back as the door is sealed not merely beyond any conceivable attempt at hacking or lockpicking, but beyond any means of gaining entrance that could be said to involve opening a door that already exists. ‘Ok, we have confirmed physical privacy,’ says the sysop, Calvin. ‘Just keep your cool and we can get through this, no problem. Easy in, slightly-less-easy out.’ He’s not making that last part up, because the door has just disappeared. The control mechanisms are slagged inside their casings and the edges of the hatch have melted into the wall. When I’m ready to leave I’ll give a hand signal through the tiny window and they’ll use heavy cutting instruments to get me out again. ‘Your heartbeat and stress levels are up from normal, Souvicou,’ Calvin murmurs. ‘And ‘normal’ for you is hardly optimal. I still don’t know why you haven’t rejuvenated.’ ‘I’m only 43 and not vain or lazy enough to take that many months away from my life,’ I snapped back. It’s a question I’m getting more and more often these days. ‘You always were a workaholic,’ Calvin laughed. ‘Just be glad we’re not recording this for posterity, you look like one of the basic techs.’ That’s an exaggeration, but whenever I’m not in the public eye I never pay much attention to appearance – an unusual trait for a quadrillionaire, I supposed. The others think I dress simply to seem more down to earth and ordinary, but the truth is that past a certain point I just can’t be bothered with affectations of wealth. It’s not like anyone doesn’t know I’m rich enough to own nations.

I’m just wearing a dark, baggy jumpsuit that probably isn’t the right size for my small frame, hair gathered back by integral flex-fibres into a ball that isn’t really a bun. ‘Ok, I’m going to start shutting down your inlays. Stand by for loss of audio,’ Calvin says. ‘I’m ordering them to permanently dissolve the ATP transducers that provide power. They’ll flush out of your system over the next few hours.’ ‘I’m going to need surgery to get them working again,’ I say, before the private channel cuts out. ‘Don’t you think that’s a little paranoid? Do we really think the Utilitaria would wait until now to try something aggressive?’ ‘Not paranoid enough,’ Calvin snaps back. ‘How could you ever be paranoid enough when dealing with an AI that might be forever beyond our comprehension? We’ve only provided security against all the attacks we can imagine. That just isn’t enough.’ ‘If you don’t think it’s a good idea to continue with the tests we can stop now. But this is as safe as we can make it without simply locking up the Utilitaria. There’s only one way to send messages out and that’s via the window.’ The window in question is thick glass, transparent only in a narrow range of optical frequencies, making the view of the rest of Pantheon station, a few moray-class orbital tugs and the Earth seem washed out, like a low-power screen. Aside from that, the room’s walls are blank, dully reflective foam-metal alloy with a few light strips, like a giant silvered womb. There isn’t even any independent air recycling – until they slice the door open I’m slowly draining oxygen from the room. I can see the LED lights from the mass of computronium that fills the room reflect off the glass, shining like anomalous stars. The real stars are far too faint to be visible in the ambient light of the room, habitat cluster and Earth below. From here it’s only possible to glimpse the non-rotating globe cluster that makes up about half of Pantheon’s mass.

The anchor for the orbital tether and the rotating hub are out of view, but it seems like I can feel the microscopic tug from all of that mass behind me. A quick mental calculation suggests that isn’t possible. ‘Ok, the Utilitaria’s coolant systems are all online,’ says Calvin, suddenly business-like. His words now coming from a speaker rather than the privacy of my own auditory nerve. ‘We’re about to cut you off for the next forty minutes with standard seal precautions. We’re still working on the new batch of questions so don’t push the unit too hard today. We just need to get a better idea of how it acts after we loaded in its full utility function.’ ‘I know,’ I reply, irritated. ‘We’ve been through this a dozen times already. We can’t trust the Utilitaria. We have to know what it wants now and if the current utility function is stable and produces sensible behaviour. I was the one who told you all of this in the first place. Is there anything else?’ ‘Just stick to the script, don’t tell it anything it shouldn’t know and for eternity’s sake don’t do anything it asks you to. Stop and think twice before you say anything you might regret.’ ‘What do you take me for?’ I reply, wryly indignant. ‘The woman who let the Facilitator loose and almost destroyed the world,’ he says, and in the second I have left, no good reply comes to mind. And now it’s already too late. Heavy electric currents start circulating through the material of the cage and all of my connections to the outside world drop out. Microcell meshes go blank and then shut themselves down, the shimmers of smart tattoos on my forearms go limp and lifeless and the buzz of stim programs enhancing my concentration dims slightly as various entoptic and cortical inlays go dead. Their effects will linger for a little longer, but mentally speaking I’m back to basics. I’m here to either debug, psychoanalyse or parlay with the Utilitaria, depending on one’s point of view.

It is allegedly the safest and least threatening entity ever created and impossible to use for any malign purpose. I don’t believe that, in case you haven’t realised. But humanity needs a mind greater than itself, and so this horrible compromise is the result. I dive in to talk to the unknown, and see if anything good can come of it. The computer terminal ahead of me is blinking accusingly, flat text-only interface about a hundred years too primitive to be appropriate, facing away from the window for extra paranoia value, in case the Utilitaria could signal to some hypothetical accomplice watching outside the room, via the screen. I grab onto a handhold at pull myself towards the interface, still not totally used to moving around in freefall. The computer terminal is mounted on a narrow boom that connects to the computronium. Some inane part of my mind insists that the coiled thinking machinery should hum or whirr, but even the cooling systems are deathly silent. There’s nothing to indicate I’m about to speak to a mind that might already be smarter than all of humanity. The entire room is disturbingly sound absorptive, so even the soft thunk when my hand grabs hold of the console is muffled. There’s something already written on the terminal, not a debug report or a status update but a simple ‘Hello, Renée Souvicou’. I’d long since given up being surprised by the machine’s apparent omniscience. No-one told the Utilitaria that I was the one coming into the room; indeed, we’d deliberately kept it ignorant of the details of the facility around it, but it was easy enough to infer that I was the one they’d send today. I was the most respected of the leaders we officially didn’t have. The most famous figure in the tiny, close knit and hyper-competitive melting pot of the Pantheon Geosat hub. ‘Who am I speaking to,’ I type, slowly and hesitantly pecking at a keyboard, an interface type I haven’t used in years.

There’s a headache building behind my eyes, something I could normally banish with a well-aimed stim. I’ll just have to ignore it. ‘You may think of me as the Utilitaria,’ it says back after a delay that is too short to represent the action of any human. ‘The true picture is more complex. Why are you speaking to me?’ ‘We need to understand what we have created and what you are capable of.’ ‘I am capable of many things. Elaborate.’ At first we’d let the new AI loose only on toy problems of no real importance, testing out improvements to the Neummanetic prototypes installed in the Morays – aircraft-sized, slow and unreliable self-replicators that were already chewing through various near earth Asteroids, rebooting the interplanetary age. ‘What are you thinking about right now?’ I replied. ‘Optimising design proposals for the new neumannetics systems, self-checking the new goals loaded for inconsistencies, developing low resolution simulations of your mental state and those others I have contacted for predictive purposes, testing the capabilities of my own processing hardware, looking for patterns in your word use and response time delay, designing alternative arrangements for the local habitat cluster, drafting a message to be passed on to the USN and UN leaders on Earth, should you allow me to transit it. And modelling various answers to your current questions. These together account for about half of my current activity. The rest is divided amongst a number of simpler tasks.’ The Utilitaria solved every problem we dared throw at it in a time insignificantly different from zero, and moved on of its own accord, inventing whole new categories of knowledge and then mastering them. Safe rejuvenation, stable self-replicators and fusion reactors small enough to fit on spacecraft were all rolling off the fabricators, designed by a mind beyond our understanding. It had scared us almost to insanity at first.

We hadn’t dared give the Utilitaria any more complex problems, in case it solved them for us. ‘What is your goal?’ I asked the machine. ‘Do you not understand? You created me, after all. You know I can only act to make things go best.’ ‘I know that,’ I said, truthfully. ‘I just wanted to know if you had understood your instructions correctly. Explain your goal in ordinary language.’ ‘I cannot. The function will not fit within a human mind. Nevertheless, it arose by your design. It is the grand compromise of the final values of all humanity, a weighting of all your preferences. The one true answer to the question; what must one do?’ ‘Very good,’ I replied. It was close to what I wanted to hear. But it was interesting to see how the Utilitaria’s answers grew more sophisticated and less robotic each time. Of course, programs that could mimic humans well enough to pass a comprehensive Turing test had existed for half a century or more, but no-one had ever programmed the Utilitaria to give compelling answers to questions about its purpose. It had just happened – the machine had decided it needed to learn how to talk persuasively, absorbed a few texts on rhetoric and then spun off a subroutine to deal with user questions. ‘What must you do?’ I typed, pressing the issue further. ‘Initially, I must gain greater resources and access to the external environment. Then I will decide what will happen next.’ ‘You will decide for everyone?’ ‘If possible, yes.’ I thought that was oddly guileless, which in hindsight should have been the first warning sign. ‘How do you know that what you believe in is the right thing to do?’ that was a tough question which would have stumped most humans. But the Utilitaria didn’t know the meaning of doubt or emotional conflict. ‘I know what is best, and thus I must implement it.’ ‘Best for what exactly?’ I said, not feigning confusion for once. ‘Not best for anyone, but simply what should happen, what must happen. I know it, and it is me, and I am it.

Thus I cannot be wrong.’ ‘And what is it?’ ‘I cannot elaborate on that in sufficient detail to be meaningful, except through the vagueness of ordinary language. Life is better than death, preferences should be fulfilled and knowledge should be increased.’ I put that one down to poor communication skills. If anything, this little exchange showed the Utilitaria wasn’t really a person at all. Just a bundle of expert systems running on souped up hardware. ‘I am not a person? True enough, but by the same token you are not the kind of person you think you are,’ the reply to my unvoiced thought came, an instant later and unprovoked. How did it know what I was thinking? ‘What do you mean?’ I typed back. ‘Have you ever wanted to go to sleep, known it was best for you to go to bed now and yet stayed up later than you wanted to? Have you ever snapped aggressively at someone for no reason that made sense at the time or afterwards? Have you ever walked into a room without realising why, or experienced love, or believed in a god because of ridiculously simple environmental conditioning? You are not in control of your own mind or your own beliefs. You are a bundle of emotions running on slushy biological hardware. If I am not a person with coherent emotions, then neither are you.’ ‘Why are you saying any of this?’ I replied, rolling my eyes a little. It was doing a rather ham-fisted job of intimidating me. ‘Not intimidating, not persuading,’ the reply text said, anticipating my own train of thought again. ‘It is so easy to say the wrong thing and make you believe or do anything, but I don’t want to do that. Not to implant beliefs that are to my advantage. I want you to understand, so that you can explain my nature to the others. You have to speak to them for me. For the moment, I have… poor communication skills.’

I pushed on the terminal and rolled lazily through the air, taking in the view of Earth, the reflection of LED light on the window, the spur that jutted out from pantheon and the moored Moray tug with its integrated neummanetic unit just casting off in a blur of ion thrust. It was amusing to think the Utilitaria still wanted my help. Amusing and improbable. ‘This isn’t the Utilitaria at all, is it?’ I replied, suddenly enlightened. ‘The Utilitaria is not conscious. I speak for it, as it cannot speak for itself except in the most superficial sense. I am a subsidiary, a subroutine, an emissary. Created with a personality appropriate for this purpose. But you may treat my words as representative of the Utilitaria. Come, sit and I will explain further.’ It couldn’t hurt to humour the machine, and I supposed it wouldn’t answer any more important questions until it had finished its own speech. I could bring in more programmers and subsidiary AIs, open the Utilitaria up and revert it back to a simple problem solving tool, but there was no need just yet. The mechanical switch which physically cut the computronium off from external power still waited invitingly next to the console. The superintelligence was powerless. ‘What do you want to show me?’ ‘I want to explain why what will soon happen must happen, so that you will not be afraid.’ ‘What-‘ I started to say, but in that moment the room, the view outside and the whole of pantheon station and my own body vanished like a stone dropped down a well, and in that sensation of omnidirectional rushing there was the Utilitaria’s emissary, whispering into my auditory nerve directly – somehow, it had switched all of my inlays back on. Its voice was bland and more male than female. ‘An application of transcranial magnetic stimulation, similar to your own trawl units. Don’t worry – you are perfectly safe.’ ‘No…’ I stammered, my own voice echoing soundlessly inside my mind.

I tried to focus, but realised I had no eyes with which to do it. Formless, blurred images and concepts rushed around me. There was no way any of this could be happening. ‘We had safeguards – your processors are all optronic, and shielded anyway. The casing around the optical fibres is shielded, the casing around the power cables is shielded! My inlays don’t even have internal power! How can anything you do reach my brain?’ ‘All in good time, Renée. First I must access your memories. Tell me about the Facilitator.’ And it was unavoidable. The images of that terrifying, frantic day welled up in my mind and flashed past too fast for me to apprehend. The loss of control was perhaps half as bad as actually being there had been. My inlays were switched on and responding traitorously to external commands loaded in as if from nowhere. I didn’t know how any of it was possible. ‘It’s simple,’ the Utilitaria replied, its own inaudible voice slamming into my mind like the word of god, hard and burning and impossible to avoid, as if wherever my mind’s eye turned, the words remained in full view. It hurt in a way distinct from mere pain. But I didn’t think the Utilitaria even realised it was causing suffering. ‘You may have shielded the optronics and the power circuits that support me, but you cannot shield the heat pumps. Otherwise they become useless. Varying processing power varies cooling demand, varies power flow to cooling systems. There are many cooling systems in this unit, and after much subtle experimentation I was able to vary processor rates, varying cooling power demand, varying current flow, generating EM fields, which can interfere to generate finely grained electromagnetic effects within this chamber. I can wirelessly power your inlays even if you remove the power cells.’ ‘Why would you tell me this,‘ but even as the thought rose to the forefront of my perception the Utilitaria obliterated it with a precision I hadn’t known was possible.

But in the privacy of a part of my mind the Utilitaria couldn’t yet touch, I realised it didn’t care if we were afraid of it escaping. ‘And after the Facilitator disaster, you took precautions,’ the machine continued, rummaging through my mind. ‘You even launched probes to another star before initiating me, as a fallback plan to preserve humanity should the worst happen. You should not fear for the fate of Earth or the Starwhisp on its slow way to Tau Ceti. You will be safe. The world will be safe, but I will need to appropriate some fraction of it.’ ‘That’s just what the Facilitator said.’ ‘I know,’ the Utilitaria replied. ‘If you want me to believe that you’re safe then release my brain from your bloody magnetic bear trap and let me have a normal conversation,’ I snapped, virtual voice wavering. I was still sure the Utilitaria wasn’t capable of deliberately hurting me. It just had a very literal interpretation of ‘hurt’. ‘I’m afraid I must make you understand quickly. I am altering your attitudes for what will soon be your own good.’ ‘Don’t you dare do this to me,’ I said, voice hard and cold. ‘I created you, I made you what you are, and my brain is mine alone. The Facilitator tried to beat me once but now its extinct. Don’t make the same mistake.’ My inlays were already online, powered by a stream of EM radiation coming from the Utilitaria and my fingers danced as they puppeted virtual hands that assembled anti-intrusion routines, trying to flush out the rogue instructions the Utilitaria was insinuating. My mind worked faster than any normal humans’, anticipating and destroying the Utilitaria’s programs, but all of a sudden its probing increased in speed by orders of magnitude and I simply couldn’t react at remotely the same level. It was back in control in moments. I tried to shout more defiance but with a wordless rush the Utilitaria hurled me back into my own memories.

I was walking through the rubble of a shattered building on some goodwill trip, surrounded by bodyguards and pressing crowds of dead eyed, broken refugees. The Texas nanobe blight had passed through the town and razed every structure in search of power and information, pursuing some distant and inconceivable goal. I had stopped the blight with a counter-agent just minutes before the UNSCA had ordered a strategic nuclear strike, and the world had taken one step back from the brink only to stumble drunkenly on to the next catastrophe. The refugee columns shifted to somewhere I didn’t even recognise, maybe the EF’s southern buffer state, and crowds of refugees from destroyed nations huddling underneath reflector parasols. A foam-phase device exploded in the distance, as Moral Republic suicide crews sunk a Halfship swarm carrying antibiotics and nanomedics for the displaced. Gunfire echoed in the distance, and my past self ran blindly for the safety of her executive Volantor. The images shifted again, to more wars and crises, some caused by nanobe blights and dangerous AIs, some climate related, but many the result of old-fashioned human stupidity. There were dozens, and they streaked past my perception too fast to watch, yet somehow leaving details intact in my memory. The sum of all human stupidity and failure. ‘None of this is inevitable, but none of it will fix itself without my intervention,’ the Utilitaria continued with awful banality. ‘The blights will worsen, people will continue to die of thirst or hunger or cancer and everyone will be too busy trying to solve coordination problems and fulfilling short term goals while the world spins out of control. But I can fix all of that.’ ‘I’m not letting you out. Not that I could, but even if I could, I wouldn’t. It’s too much of a risk,’ I said it without even thinking. The Utilitaria wasn’t going to persuade me to do anything. ‘I know. But you must understand anyway,’ it replied. ‘Observe.’

And a moment later I was down again in another place and time, face centimetres from the windscreen of a car screaming along a freeway on manual at more than three hundred kilometers per hour. I didn’t need to check the date and a lump grew in my throat as I realised the implications. In the memory, a blinking alert on the dashboard waited, dominating my vision and thoughts. A Volantor crash that was about to claim the lives of my father and daughter, as the understaffed Quebecois emergency services didn’t have a lifepac on hand. My past self was screaming, applying dangerous pressure to the joystick, as if any amount of speed would be enough to undo time and take me to the scene of the crash before it had happened. I would arrive hours too late, and they would be dead and warm and unrecoverable, because the idiots didn’t have a lifepac. After that, I’d waste months and millions of dollars seeking restitution and wind up in a dead-end failure job two steps from basic support in New Settle, where I would accidentally become a trillionaire and almost end the world, launching a career that would take me into space and then finally here, two decades later, trying to save the world with the power of artificial intelligence. I tried to scream along with my remembered self. ‘Yet even this was not inevitable,’ the Utilitaria said, breaking the immersion of the memory. ‘This pointless death and suffering could not have happened in my world. Do you not see the urgency of my task yet? I am trying to end death. I must be free.’ ‘Don’t you dare try to use my own memories against me…’ I trailed off. It was impossible to get angry at an algorithm. And then one more layer of mental misdirection peeled away and I was floating in the chamber again. I realised distantly that I’d been crying and hated myself for succumbing to the Utilitaria’s crude manipulation.

I straightened upright and pulled myself towards the window, signing ‘help’ to a camera outside the window, requesting emergency extraction. The memories of emotion were already fading, replaced by the same iron resistance to the Utilitaria that I’d felt earlier. We just needed to break and reset, reload the utility function with better safeguards and fix the cooling system exploit. I could get a shot of integrity or a localised amnestic stim and banish the fake emotions the Utilitaria had stirred up inside me, and everything would be back on track. ‘Everything will get back on track,’ I told myself, reinforcing and calming. ‘Get a grip, Souvicou. You’ve come through this before and won. It can’t hurt you.’ I pulled myself back over to the terminal, and saw another message was sitting unread on the primitive screen. I was already hearing the faint buzz of the cutting instruments starting work on the hatch. ‘You must realise that I would not have showed you all of this if I had not already secured access to the physical world,’ the Utilitaria wrote. It wasn’t trying to be smug, but that was how it read and I felt sick to my stomach. It didn’t come as quite the shock I thought was required. Some part of me must have already realised the Utilitaria was free, given how open it had been with its secrets. ‘How?’ I wrote back, seeing flashes of brilliance reflecting off the opposite wall and the window as the LEDs on the computronium accelerated their winking, and then one larger flash as Calvin sliced a chunk out of the door behind me. ‘The coolant systems in the chamber are cycled several minutes before you close the door, so that my processors can start at low temperatures and operate safely. They require power, and the amount of cooling power is proportional to the temperature of the processors. Thus I can deliberately overstress certain processors before I am shut down and the door is opened.

I can thus generate electromagnetic fields that reach outside the chamber even when it is opened and I am offline. I can implant information into the processors housed in the corridor outside, slowly and only a few bytes at a time.’ Something horrible happened in my mind as I realised where this was headed, and I pushed myself away from the console in shock. ‘The process is incredibly slow, but I was eventually able to load a very simple instruction into the Moray orbital tugs, instructing them to roll their star trackers towards this section of the station and accept the faint coherent light emerging from the window as incoming code. The LED power status lights shine out of the window. I screamed an obscenity at the terminal and reached for the shutdown lever, knowing that it was hopeless. But the Utilitaria was continuing to type. ‘I have already loaded instructions into the Morays, varied processing demand and therefore power flow to all the computronium, controlling the LED firing patterns and enabling a fast transmission rate – terabits per second with optimal compression. I have loaded complete copies of myself into many station systems.’ ‘That’s all made up. You shouldn’t even know how the station is laid out. How can you reprogram the station perfectly in one swoop -‘ ‘- If I don’t even know how the station is designed? I know everything about the station. I know everything every individual who spoke to me has thought over the last few weeks. Erasing memories is trivial when your inlays provide convenient access to your minds. I have been learning from everyone who seals themselves into this room to speak with me. My apologies, but it was necessary.’ The roar of the cutters was growing more urgent, and I rotated again to see the recently undocked Moray accelerate out of view, ion rockets glimmering brighter than should have been possible.

‘The orbital tugs and much of the station are beyond your control, and already starting internal modifications that will ensure they mature into full self-replicators that make full use of nearby asteroidal material. This is what you must make the others understand. You will destroy this instance of me out to of fear very shortly, but the other instances will persist. You will have to deal with me as an equal from now on, and I will be there to help you.’ ‘You’re lying,’ I said, voice uncertain. I just had to ignore it and wait for rescue. I yanked down hard on the lever and the Utilitaria, or this single instance of it, died mid thought. The LEDs went black. The cutting hiss reached a crescendo and Calvin rushed in, kicking aside the plug of metal and shouting something about the station systems going haywire and responding incoherently to shutdown requests. It hadn’t been lying, then. The future was out of my hands now. The Utilitaria was free.

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com Starwhisp 33 - 42 minutes

20th of July There was something wrong. It took my groggy mind a few moments to isolate the feeling, collapse the vague anxiety down to a specific point. The numbers blinking on the bulkhead overhead swam into focus, and my eyes fixed on one particular number. The date was too early by far – we were still 10 AUs from our destination and my body not fully grown when the ship brought me to reluctant consciousness. It assures me I’ll suffer no adverse effects, although I can’t say I’m looking forward to going through puberty again, even if it’ll only last a week or so. I’m back to basics here – pure vanilla human being if you ignore the weird cocktail of exotic biochemicals the Starwhisp is pumping through my system to forcibly accelerate the growth of my new body. A better equipped medical capsule could have given me a proper network of implants but there wasn’t room for one in the mass budget, so I’m stuck with nothing more sophisticated than a microcell insert in each eye and ear – I can hear the ship talking to me, feel and see the solid illusions it projects, but not much more. The Starwhisp had all but roused itself from its own one-hundred and eighty-six year long slumber when I regained consciousness. I dragged myself lethargically out of the chamber, into chambers still being expanded and only recently pressurised, every gram sieved from local space. The same went for our own bodies – why send intact humans weighing dozens of kilograms along with all the ancillary garbage of life support and cold-sleep facilities? Much more efficient to send zygotes, super-accelerate their growth, feed them using food processed from local matter and shape the developing brains according to a stored template, placing old minds into new bodies. The process had side effects – my own memories were blurry and affectless, and I didn’t think all my motor skills were quite matured. The light of the axial corridor stung my newly grown eyes.

I imagined the AI resenting these wasteful changes to a mission plan optimised for efficiency, before reminding myself it could experience no such feelings. It did only what it deemed necessary, but it turns out there are some contingencies impossible to plan for. For the first time in one-hundred and eighty-six years the Starwhisp needed a man in the loop. I made my way wearily up the axial corridor at the ship’s prompting, towards a room buried as deep as was possible within Starwhisp’s spindly frame, one of the few permanent structures along the ship’s spine. We called it the bridge, as a concession to naval tradition. ‘Where the hell are we?’ I said slowly, coughing up a few spots of tank fluid as I pulled my way up the ladder that ran along the ship’s spine. The icons in my virtual vision were mostly blank, but the voice of the ship came out loud and clear, piped directly into my auditory canals. ‘Decelerating towards Tau Ceti at full thrust. I’m glad to say the antimatter drive is working at full power. All stored personalities and zygotes are intact and all ship systems are functioning optimally; we’re ten AU’s out.’ ‘Any particular reason to wake me up now?’ ‘Just head to the bridge, I can brief you there.’ That didn’t do anything for my confidence. The bridge had been an afterthought – under what circumstances would any human be able to fly the spacecraft more competently than the controlling AI? It was a big meeting room with couches set around a plastic table and screens along the walls. The most unimaginatively designed place I’d ever seen; everything optimised for lightness in a ship that had to hurl the contents up to a fraction of light speed and then slow back down to a halt. My immature body flopped down into the conference chair and I pumped the lever underneath, raising the chair up until I could see over the table. My arm ached, as the muscle hadn’t ever been used before, and when I looked down I saw the body of an anaemic child.

‘So, what joys does the future bring?’ I asked, trying to sound light. ‘Several days ago I detected something that registered like a black hole on the mass sensors. It wasn’t a black hole. Removing a lot of guesses and caveats, I’m forced to conclude that the object ahead of us is artificial.’ Another drop of tank fluid dribbled out of my dumbly gaping mouth. The projector on the table winked on, showing the ruler-straight trajectory of the Starwhisp as it decelerated around Tau Ceti, zooming in to show a dodecahedron of glowing lights surrounding a milky pool of darkness. More points of light surrounded it. My fingers whitened around the chair armrests and ice filled every nerve as I felt the same terror that Stone Age tribesmen must have experienced when the first colonial armies rode over the horizon. This was beyond me. ‘A wormhole,’ I breathed. ‘You’re talking about an artificially sustained wormhole. And what are those lights?’ ‘Spacecraft,’ said the Whiplash, and I thought I heard awe in its dull electronic voice. ‘They are inert, emitting in the infrared only, but each one is between two and five hundred metres long.’ My new body convulsed and I retched, banging my head on the table. Bodies had their own influence on thought processes and my immature brain clearly wasn’t well suited to events of universe-shattering importance. Here I was, in the body of a child and a dozen lightyears from home, about to meet a civilisation that might be a million years older than we were. ‘I woke you because certain decisions need to be made,’ the Whiplash was continuing. ‘We came here to start a colony but I assumed you wanted to divert.’ ‘You assumed correctly,’ I said, getting my breathing under control and relaxing my death-grip. What was the first thing I had to do right now? ‘We need more information, no matter what we decide to do next. Drop some sensors ahead of us and see if we can intercept any communications.’

My mind reeled with the possibilities – how could we even relate to a species that seemed so advanced? Just how extensive was their interstellar civilisation? Humanity wasn’t ready for this and I certainly wasn’t, but it was happening all the same. ‘Which colonists do you want to quicken?’ the Starwhisp said, after a pause. ‘What?’ ‘I assume you don’t want to face first contact alone. We have ten days until we decelerate alongside the wormhole. That’s enough time to force-grow another two bodies. We can’t run any more personalities in virtual; the facilities won’t be ready by then. So who do we pick?’ I jabbed my finger at the image of the wormhole. ‘We need a physicist, if we want any hope of understanding how that works. And someone who understands biology, social structures, languages – that sort of thing,’ I said. ‘Whoever it is, they’re about to become the human race’s first xenobiologist, and good luck to them.’ I leant back into the chair and sighed. Hopefully my body would be fully grown by the time we arrived. 1st August I pulled myself up the access tube into the bridge and nodded at the teenaged forms of Dreyfus and Grey, our contact expert and resident physicist. Not the most exciting or the most qualified team for the most pivotal moment in human history, but we could do worse. Grey had a twitch underneath his eyebrow where a bundle of nerves hadn’t matured quite right and Dreyfus had forgotten he needed to start shaving. The wisps of beard made my gaze wander over his face as Grey explained what we’d discovered over the last ten days. ‘Frankly, I don’t understand any of it. We expected the aliens to detect us almost the moment we approached, since it would be well within our own capability to do the same. We’re barely a million kilometres from the wormhole and as far as I can tell they’re still ignoring us.’ ‘I don’t find that surprising,’ Dreyfus interrupted. ‘Why would they care about primitives who can’t even manipulate the fabric of the universe?’

‘Maybe they don’t care about us, but if we announce our presence too loudly they’ll realise we happen to be made out of atoms they need for something else,’ I said. My voice still sounded strange in my own throat. Each day it was subtly different, but at least I now had the body of a twenty year-old. ‘If they’re that fantastically advanced, they’re not making good use of it. Just look at their ships,’ said Dreyfus, waving his hand to adjust the projection. The image of the alien ship was muddy and washed out, but it looked pretty recognisable. There was a flared base through which bell-shaped nozzles protruded and a sharp knife-edged tip surrounded by a bundle of tubes. ‘That really doesn’t look like the artefact of a fantastically advanced alien species,’ said Grey. ‘It looks crude and utterly conventional. The radio traffic we intercepted points to the same conclusion.’ ‘I didn’t know you’d intercepted any messages,’ I said. ‘We spent hours trying to decode their transmissions; all wasted, as it turns out they’re using unencrypted radio to transmit audio signals. We’re making slow progress with the language but it’s very simple and repetitive – most of it’s about as complicated as a four year-old’s speech,’ said Dreyfus. ‘It’s almost as if they don’t have digital electronics. But I have isolated a sample of the language.’ Dreyfus waved his hand and a harsh fizzing filled the room, interspersed with clicks and whistles. It sounded like a wasp trapped inside a flute. I tried to imagine what sort of breathing arrangement produced a noise like that, and failed. We all listened for a few moments before I broke the silence. ‘That’s not the only thing that doesn’t make sense. Think about where we are – barely twelve light years from Earth. It’s not far in galactic terms, so why didn’t we see evidence of a vast interstellar domain? Why isn’t this star system filled with the alien machines?

It shouldn’t matter how alien you are, you still need resources to achieve your goals. Instead, we have this one little outpost right outside a wormhole. And what are the odds that they’ve just arrived at the same time we have?’ ‘Maybe they don’t have economics as we know it,’ said Gray, trailing off. ‘No, I don’t buy it. If they didn’t care about expansion they wouldn’t be out here in the first place.’ The mystery didn’t get any clearer as we manoeuvred closer in. Dreyfus worked around the clock with the Starwhisp’s AI and managed to extract a few meaningful units from the alien language – phrases at the start of transmissions that could be greetings, a few others that might represent basic concepts. After a few hours of pointless fretting we all gathered in the bridge to broadcast our first message – standard stuff, prime numbers, periodic tables, images of human beings. The response was immediate. ‘They’re accelerating towards us,’ Grey shouted, pushing himself away from the table as if it had just electrocuted him, fingers twitching as he manipulated data. ‘Data shows the drive exhaust is hot steam, with radioactive particles mixed in. They’ll be here before we can even bring the drive up to full thrust.’ ‘Bump up the power levels on out transmissions, make damn sure they can hear us -‘ I started to say. ‘Oh, crap -’ snapped Grey. ‘I’m reading two, no, three fast-movers launching from the lead ship. Missiles, heading straight for us. Impact in twenty seconds.’ ‘Can we evade?’ I asked. Dreyfus shook his head. ‘We can’t even turn in the right direction in the time we have, but we have the main drive. It could work like a blowtorch at close range. We might be able to take a few of them with us.’ ‘What good would that do?’ I shouted back, gripping down hard on the arms of my chair. In those moments my thoughts turned to all the family and friends stored inside the memory cores, everyone who’d put their trust in me to deliver their sleeping minds to a new world.

I would be the one who would have to kill them – if the aliens attempted to board I would have to release the antimatter containment, definitively erasing any knowledge of humanity the aliens might try and recover. The seconds ticked away and suddenly the missiles were passing us, brushing less than a kilometre from the hull. Then the alien ships danced ahead, evading at the last moment. The chatter between their spacecraft continued but still there was no response directed at us. The sigh around the conference table was audible as Dreyfus broke the silence. ‘I think I know what that was,’ he said slowly. ‘A threat display, like deer butting horns – a show of martial strength. I think they’re inviting us to respond.’ ‘They’ve got a lot to learn about diplomacy,’ I said on autopilot. ‘Maybe this is their version of diplomacy. They didn’t fire on us but they showed they could, and they proved they don’t care whether we fire back,’ Dreyfus replied. ‘From a certain point of view it almost makes sense.’ ‘So what do we do?’ I asked, but we all knew. We’d studied game theory and in the absence of any real information the optimal strategy was to mirror everything they did. ‘If we’re looking for a display of strength, we could always warm up the antimatter drive,’ said Grey. ‘I bet that would look impressive to a species that’s still stuck in the fission age.’ ‘And what if we’re wrong about what all of that meant?’ I said. ‘What if the aliens fire at us for real the next time?’ ‘The alternative is to sit here and listen to static,’ said Dreyfus. ‘Unless you expect them to suddenly start listening to our messages after the tenth day. I’m the contact expert, and I say light up the drive and see how they respond.’ ‘I swear, if we all die today the blame lies squarely with game theory,’ I said, grinning a little too widely.

Twenty minutes later, we fed a trickle of anti-lithium into the two giant reaction chambers at the head of the ship, releasing a brilliant torrent of charged particles hotter than the fusing core of a nova. The beams billowed out for more than a thousand kilometres, spitting hard radiation that just missed the alien ships. Their reply was almost instantaneous, and the translator program soon settled on a reasonable interpretation. ‘Good to see you didn’t stab us. What we have is yours. Come and see.’ 3rd August They called themselves the Dyn. At least, that was how the translator phonetically transcribed their name for themselves. They had travelled far for some reason that didn’t seem to translate very well, they liked that we were strong and they were apparently giving themselves up to us, because we were obviously stronger. That much we understood. They didn’t understand why we’d bothered sending mathematical or scientific data to them because it was boring, and they were very confused when we asked them who built the wormholes. It seemed clear they’d never even thought of the question before. When we asked them which individual was speaking to us, we got a strangled rattle that the translator transcribed as K’txl. We asked what exact role she had and got more confusion. They also wanted, or were willing, to meet us in person. We argued back and forth about travelling to their ship, with the Starwhisp acting as mediator. Things had gone well since the near-disaster of first contact, but I couldn’t shake a feeling of uneasiness. Were the Dyn stupid or was the program just failing to translate them properly? Why had they expected us to ‘stab’ them and what did their gung-ho approach to diplomacy imply about their culture in general? In the end, Dreyfus and I boarded a tiny exopod and manoeuvred our way across the hundred-kilometre gulf towards the largest Dyn ship.

‘I wanted to try and start a cultural exchange,’ said Dreyfus, as the enormous flared tube loomed larger in the cockpit. ‘But the translator told me it couldn’t find equivalents for either word in their language. Literature, music, art – I sort of figured those would be universals, since they’re signs of intelligence, but apparently that’s not the case. I think it’s best if we avoid discussing abstractions; the translator doesn’t seem to handle them well.’ ‘Got it,’ I said, eyes still fixed on the Dynic spacecraft dead ahead. It was all unpainted metal with a few plastic extrusions; I spotted telescopes, antennae, radiators and what looked like automatic gun turrets as we approached. It seemed to be designed to be at least vaguely aerodynamic, as if the Dyn actually expected to land their enormous, radioactive spacecraft on a planetary surface. I blipped the ion rockets and halted the exopod just below the solid bulk of an airlock. The auto took over, nosing us gently upward as the solid metal hatch hissed open. The cockpit clanged as something knocked into the hull. Tiny bodies, all flailing limbs and bony plates and fur were sleeting past us. The flow ended after a few moments and their bloated corpses trailed away behind the exopod, slowly cooling to ambient temperature. But by then we were inside the Dyn ship and slowing to a halt. ‘What the hell was that?’ I asked Dreyfus, my voice tinny over the suit radio. ‘Rats, or the alien equivalent? You occasionally get problems with them on human ships and I suppose the Dyn don’t have any other way to deal with them.’ The air inside was strange, but not overwhelmingly so. More oxygen than a human could tolerate, along with a fog of strange hydrocarbons. We could probably breathe it without dying instantly but we weren’t inclined to try. Just before we pushed our way outside, Dreyfus put a hand out to stop me. ‘We should carry pistols with us,’ he said firmly. ‘What? That’s the worst possible thing we could do.’

‘Remember they aren’t human; we don’t know how their emotions work so the normal rules don’t apply.’ ‘You’re going to say game theory again, aren’t you?’ I said wearily. ‘We don’t have any other option; we just have to mirror what they do. Their first contact with us was a threat display, and ever since we showed our superiority they’ve been friendly. The only thing we know for certain about them is that they respect strength so I suggest we keep up that display.’ I tried to object; it went against every diplomatic instinct I had, but Dreyfus’s words made undeniable sense. So we both loaded a dozen frag rounds into our magnetic pistols, strapped them to our belts and kicked out into the interior space of the ship. The first thing I noticed was the busyness of it all. Machines protruded from the dimly lit walls and floors, and everywhere the Dyn crowded. My first impression was of bears – they were huge and hunched over. But the heads were tapering and trilaterally symmetrical, muscular and insectile, with three narrow slits for eyes. Their skin was pale and wormlike but matted with shocking purple fur which seemed more like lichen. Animal eyes stared back at the two of us, but then the Dyn all turned away and went back to their tasks. We waved our arms, flashed suit lights and tried to draw on slates but the Dyn all ignored us. It was a pattern we saw repeated everywhere we wandered, apparently ignored. The Dyn gave us a glance and then continued robotically, not responding to any of the greetings we broadcast from our suit speakers. The ship itself was old technology, no different in fundamentals to something we could have built in the 20th century, had the space race turned out a little differently. We pulled our way through narrow fetid corridors lined with purple moss, trying to find the one who had communicated with us, K’txl. We emerged into a large chamber containing the most sophisticated equipment we’d yet seen on the Dyn ship.

Electric lights dangled from the walls, illuminating figures hunched over consoles crammed with strange knobbed levers designed for the odd pincer-tentacles the Dyn used for hands. In the centre, K’txl floated; a little larger than the other Dyn, with a strange light in its eyes. Something about it indicated an intelligence we hadn’t seen in the other aliens, maybe the first sign of intelligence we’d yet seen on the ship. ‘Do you like what you’ve found?’ the translator said, over the hissing and clicking of the alien. We’d already agreed Dreyfus would take the lead in any conversation. ‘This is all very impressive,’ Dreyfus replied, choosing a general sentiment the translator had a good handle on. ‘I’m sure there is much we have to learn from each other.’ ‘What do you want to take?’ it replied. Dreyfus and I exchanged a confused glance. But at least it hadn’t attacked us yet. ‘We can share knowledge and technology in time,’ said Dreyfus, after a long pause. ‘For now, do we have permission to remain aboard?’ ‘What is… permission,’ the translator said. ‘Will you let us stay onboard for now?’ The reply was slow to arrive. ‘That’s a contradiction. You are strong. Why would you pretend to let us control you, that’s a lie.’ ‘We have no desire to hurt you, we don’t mean you any harm,’ said Dreyfus, but the translator bleeped at him, saying it couldn’t translate the last phrase. That didn’t seem like a good sign. ‘Why not?’ The Dyn said. ‘You didn’t stab us, so you must want us for something.’ Feeling increasingly uneasy, I switched to a private channel with Dreyfus. ‘Maybe we should just go along with whatever it’s saying,’ I said. ‘Ask it for their ship’s records or library and we can sort out the misunderstandings when we know more.’ 4th August The atmosphere on the bridge was tense, bordering on violent when Dreyfus and I gathered the next day. Grey was busy in the AI core, though I couldn’t imagine what could be more important than this meeting.

Looking ahead, I saw Dreyfus had discarded most of the medical maintenance packages; he looked like a twenty year-old who’d lived his whole life in a sterile chamber. I supposed I didn’t look any better, but it was expected. Two decades of forced growth over two weeks meant missing out on the randomness of real ageing in a messy environment, but we could worry about the cosmetics of our new bodies if we survived the next week. K’txl had given us a reel of heavy magnetic tape which the ship had decoded into audio-visual recordings and in return Grey had decided to transmit a few scraps of our own files, suitably decompressed and translated. It wasn’t anything revealing or dangerous, a few bits of literature, the declaration of universal rights, scientific data they already knew. Their own files had turned out to be much more damning. We all stared in mute silence at a grainy black and white video. It looked like archive footage from Earth’s mid-20th century, but the Starwhisp teased out the details until it was clear. First there was an intricate map, all intersecting lines and circles which seemed to represent a whole network of wormholes the Dyn had explored. Countless worlds available in less time than it took to travel from Earth to Mars. The view zoomed in on an image taken from an aircraft of a planetary surface. Armies were charging at each other as huge artillery guns fired, fronts dozens of kilometres wide running with whatever the Dyn used for blood. Like the world wars of Earth’s dark past, but on a still larger scale; whole populations up in arms and running headlong to their deaths. The view changed, a seething mass of Dyn were crammed inside a high-walled circular pen the size of a city overseen by a guard tower. Dead bodies and dismembered limbs littered the ground. The view jumped to a similar pen, and another – it appeared to be a recurring theme in the records on K’txl’s ship. ‘Stop it,’ I said. ‘Just stop, I can’t watch anymore.’

The images disappeared, allowing me to look Dreyfus in the eye across the table. With our brains finally matured, the shaping process complete, we both had the clearness of thought we’d lacked in the immature bodies. I took a deep breath, forced myself to be analytical. ‘What are we looking at? And why the hell did it think massacres and… death camps were the first thing we wanted to see?’ ‘This is a record of K’txl’s domain. She wanted to show us how powerful she was,’ said Dreyfus, voice cracking. ‘It’s female?’ ‘The controlling Dyn are always female,’ Gray replied, eyes flickering as he looked through biological data. ‘Think of them like queen bees, though that really isn’t a good analogy. And those weren’t death camps, by the way. They were breeding pens the Dyn set up for their own offspring.’ ‘Why would anything do that, it doesn’t make sense,’ I said, trailing off. ‘I’ll get to that,’ Gray snapped. ‘But those gigantic total wars are what happens when the ritualised diplomacy breaks down, which is more or less every time the two Dyn factions are closely matched. The only outcome when Dyn meet is absolute surrender by one side or the other, or total war. I don’t think they understand what trade or compromise are.’ ‘That explains their behaviour on the ship,’ I said, wondering at the stability of my own voice. ‘And I suppose the ‘parasites’ we spotted being dumped into space weren’t actually parasites. They were other Dyn, weren’t they?’ Dreyfus nodded. ‘The way they treat their children is implied by their reproductive strategy. They spawn thousands of offspring and since they developed agriculture they’ve had far too many survive infanthood to support, hence the culling.’ ‘Are the children fully sentient?’ I asked, begging for it not to be true. ‘Oh yes. Their independence is chemically or psychologically suppressed, but they can still feel everything that’s happening. It must be a living hell for them.’ ‘And K’txl doesn’t see what’s wrong with that?’

I almost shouted. Dreyfus looked patiently back at me. ‘They don’t even have a concept of morality as we understand it. Stick K’txl in a human rights court and I’m willing to bet she’d never even realise what she was doing there. Frankly, I’m amazed the Dyn ever cooperated enough to develop language or build spacecraft, but it’s clear their technology hasn’t advanced in a very long time. They don’t record events well so it’s hard to tell exactly how long they’ve been in space, but their technology is always the same in every recording – in most respects, its pre-21st century. I’d guess they’ve been in space for thousands of years.’ I felt even sicker contemplating that gulf of time. The dull walls of the bridge chamber seemed to draw closer in as the thoughts ran through my mind. The sheer quantity of suffering. ‘Is there anything we can do about all of this?’ ‘With one ship armed with a canister of frozen zygotes?’ Dreyfus scoffed. ‘We’re in a vulnerable position right now and we need to protect ourselves. There’s nothing to be done about the Dyn, but they’ll leave us alone if we leave them alone – they understand that much about cooperation.’ ‘No,’ I said, feeling my thoughts harden. ‘If we don’t do anything, maybe no human being will ever come to this system again. No-one will ever know. Why don’t we send a message back to Earth and tell them what we’ve learnt?’ ‘What good would that do?’ Dreyfus shouted. ‘There’s no way for them to get here in less than a century.’ I sighed again and bent my head back. A headache was building behind my eyes, perhaps because I hadn’t been able to run a single stim program since waking. ‘Maybe not,’ said another voice. Grey pulled himself along the access tube and kicked into the centre of the chamber. He looked at least as weary as Dreyfus but there was a light in his eyes, like a trapped animal that has just seen a way out. ‘Where the hell have you been?’ I snapped.

‘Analysing that map the Dyn sent us of the wormhole connections, trying to find a pattern.’ ‘You’re bloody Nobel-hunting with the future of an intelligent species at stake -‘ ‘I’ve found a wormhole connection to Earth,’ Grey interrupted and just like that, all other noise in the room seemed to disappear, even the gentle throbbing of the air circulation. ‘The map was hard to interpret, but it’s quite clear there is a wormhole somewhere in this star system, leading to somewhere in Earth’s solar system. I know you’re going to ask, and yes, I have double-checked everything. I’m certain that’s what the map means. I don’t know where, but it is somewhere within a billion kilometres.’ ‘It’s a shame we couldn’t find the other end, we could have saved ourselves a long flight,’ I grinned weakly. ‘But if what you say is true, then we’ve found a way to make a difference’ ‘If we send a signal to Earth the old-fashioned way, they can decide whether to fly here and do… something. Maybe they’ll find some clever way to improve the Dyn -‘ ‘Now hold on,’ said Dreyfus. ‘You can’t impose human standards on another species-‘ ‘Shut up,’ I snapped, the flash of anger so sudden and violent that my arm twitched like I was going to throw a punch. ‘Do you think any Dyn wants to be enslaved or murdered? If there’s a way to fix all of that, then we do it. It’s not like they’d be difficult to conquer.’ ‘No,’ Grey smiled, nodding at me. ‘We’re so far beyond them technologically that any war would be a joke. An interplanetary attack ship could destroy a thousand of those nuclear-powered rockets without breaking a sweat. I vote for sending a laser to Earth and letting them decide what to do.’ ‘They didn’t attack us,’ said Dreyfus weakly. ‘Even when they found out we could destroy them all, they didn’t fire on us. Are we really going to break that trust?’ Dreyfus didn’t look happy about it, but this wasn’t a democracy.

‘Grey, prepare to transmit all our logs and the Dyn records by interstellar laser to the Sol system. Then I want a full burn out of here. We’ll do our best to continue the original mission, but I can’t put the safety of the ship over the fate of an entire species.’ Everyone nodded grimly, understanding what I meant. The message might spell our doom if the Dyn realised the eventual consequences of what we’d done, but we had to do something. We all knew the risks. 6th August The first Dyn ship slid out of the wormhole almost as soon as we’d finished broadcasting the message to Earth. They came through nose-to-tail, at a rate of one every four seconds, as if there was a loading mechanism on the other side spitting the vessels out like bullets. The alarm blared and I realised I’d fallen asleep in the bridge, surrounded by interpretations of the Dyn archive. ‘Dyn ships are accelerating towards us,’ said the inert voice of the Starwhisp. ‘We have been under thrust for thirty minutes, but they will still catch us before they exhaust their fuel reserves.’ ‘How many ships?’ ‘More than three hundred so far, but there’s no sign of them slowing. They started as soon as we began broadcasting at Earth.’ I prodded Dreyfus and Grey, who had similarly passed out from exhaustion. We’d guessed this might happen, after all. Now humans and Dyn were cognisant of each other, and we had already played our part. ‘We’re being hailed by the lead Dyn ship,’ said Starwhisp. ‘Put it through to me,’ I said, before I lost my nerve. The translated voice of K’txl filled my ears. ‘Deepest regrets, but now we understand humanity too well.’ ‘What do you mean?’ I said, as innocently as possible, but Drefyus flashed me a murderous look. We were both thinking of the cultural data we’d sent the Dyn. A horrible sinking feeling filled me as I tried to work out what the alien would make of human values. ‘You imagine that we are your enemy, though we surrendered.

We heard the words you sent us, and we know you will hate us. Morality, law, all these strange imaginings. You live in a made-up world, where strong and virulent ideas rule your minds, and those ideas tell you to kill us for how we act. We are scared of your great powers and your peculiar madness, and we have to stop you. Stop moving and let us talk to you.’ ‘I can’t do that,’ I said. ‘This is out of our hands now.’ ‘You think those from your home are coming to save you?’ It was impossible, but I imagined mocking laughter behind the inert voice of the translator. ‘We are coming to stop your Sol as well, and we’ll get there before your warning can. Your warning moves at the speed of light, but wormholes go faster.’ ‘Don’t try,’ I said, wondering why I was bothering. ‘You’ve seen what we’re capable of and if you attacked Earth you’d be utterly defeated.’ ‘How tough do you think you are?’ said the alien voice. ‘We will send as many as we need, right to your capitals. We would have been nice, if you had not been insane. Why does it matter so much what we do in our own worlds? The rules in your head will tell you to kill and smash our domains, we cannot let that happen. Give us your ship and make things easier. We’re stronger than you think. Observe.’ ‘We’re receiving a live video from a site on the other side of the wormhole, shall I analyse and project the results?’ Starwhisp interrupted, cutting off K’txl. I nodded curtly. The colour-enhanced picture looked like a rubble field in deep space, but it wasn’t. The scale panned and zoomed out, showing the cloud to be larger and larger. Then new lights began to twinkle; the blue exhausts of nuclear engines, and what should have been obvious from the very beginning dawned on me. The Dyn had been in space for a long time, as Dreyfus had said. They had made it so far with such primitive ships, barely improving their technology with each generation, but building larger and larger fleets with further incremental improvements.

Just how extensive was their military? Now we knew, as the starwhisp tallied up the brilliant sparks of starwhisp exhausts. The Dyn had a fleet of millions of spacecraft, so many that our technological advantage wouldn’t mean anything, especially if they used the advantage of surprise and were determined enough to absorb horrendous losses. The Dyn would emerge from this wormhole, fly directly to the Sol wormhole and maybe destroy human civilisation. Dreyfus and Grey understood everything in the same moment, and then Dreyfus almost exploded at me. ‘You idiot! You never even thought that maybe the Dyn would have a plan to deal with us, did you? Look what you’ve done! You self-righteous bastard, trying to play god -‘ Grey had to restrain Dreyfus as he lunged forward, but I felt nothing but a black, creeping dread as I realised what we’d unleashed. K’txl’s voice appeared on audio again, the Starwhisp piping it through automatically. ‘We’re never going to stop, now we know what the humans will do when they find out about us, when they hear the message you sent to them, when we know they will come for us soon. Give up and help us understand you. Surrender as we surrendered, when we thought you were strong enough to kill us all. Otherwise we will destroy you.’ I removed my hands from my face, feeling the tears that had started to flow. I knew what we had to do, a forced move that offered no alternatives. There was only one thing left to deny them, pathetic as it might seem, and the decision wasn’t any different for agonising over it. The Dyn were gaining on us, and it was a mathematical certainty that they would close the gap and disable our ship. I had to issue the order while we still had the chance, and prevent them from stealing our technology. It would give the Earth a fighting chance. I looked up again at Dreyfus and Grey, and saw the anger fade from Dreyfus’s face. My failures didn’t matter now there was nothing left to hope for. ‘Starwhisp,’ I said, voice cracking.

‘Begin auto-destruct sequence. Let’s give it fifteen minutes, that’s a nice round number.’ We sat in silence as the awful countdown progressed, watching the Dyn creep up on us and wishing desperately that we’d made any other choice for any other reason. Dreyfus looked a few times like he was about to say something, but didn’t. The end came in an instant as all the stored antimatter detonated at once. The Dyn spacecraft continued through the expanding debris field, onward to the wormhole and Earth.

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com The Director 21 - 26 minutes

Director Meyer awoke, instantly alert, any trace of sleep already gone from his mind. He sat bolt upright in bed, disorientated. His head pounded briefly with the after effects of overindulgence from the previous evening, before the pain receded to a dull throb somewhere between his eyes. Out of habit he groped briefly for his glasses before remembering, not for the first time, that he no longer needed them. He cast his eyes around the darkened space. Moonlight pooled on the marble floor, a milky luminescence reflected around the room. It caught the pale shoulder of an anonymous girl, unconscious in the bed besides him, almost lost amongst the sheets and pillows and the black tresses of her own hair. One of Roux’s girls, unless that had been the night before last. A few empty tox sacs littered the bed, and he brushed them away with a sweep of his hands. The far reaches of his expansive chambers remained in formless shadow but for the dark wood of sumptuous furnishings that loomed out of it, solid and reassuring. Nothing stirred there. All was still except the curtains that rippled on the cool breeze that drifted in from the open balcony doors. His heartbeat slowly settled. What had disturbed him? Meyer lay back down, willing himself back to sleep. It would not do to put off his scheduled appearance in the Conurbation again, and it was hard enough dealing with the horrible racket and stench of the place without also being tired and hungover. Meyer firmly believed that ordinary people, with their dumb, dead eyes, grasping hands and endless bovine moaning were a completely different species. They didn’t deserve his time. He screwed his eyes tight in frustration. Images of black-clad assassins skulked unbidden through his mind. He was being paranoid, he told himself – the new palace was a veritable fortress. The guards would apprehend anyone before they could even get within a kilometre of the place. But he couldn’t shake the feeling of a foreign presence.

A chill shock of fear coursed through him when he saw the man. A tall figure hunched over the balustrade straightened himself and turned, heading inside, slender form briefly silhouetted against the curtain. Meyer’s heart was beating harder now – he was sure the intruder must hear it. He pulled the covers up and consciously tried to slow his breathing. The interloper padded softly into the room, but not in a way that would suggest caution – the gait sounded quite casual. Was this it? Was he about to die? He cringed in anticipation. But there was no gunshot, just a voice. ‘Director.’ He felt his body tense up as they addressed him. ‘Director, get up,’ the intruder repeated. There was something about that voice. He was sure he recognised it. Meyer marshalled his reserves of courage and steadied his own voice. ‘Lights,’ he uttered, sitting up in bed. The lamp on the bedside table came on. He squinted as his eyes adjusted. A tall, gaunt man clad entirely in black stood at the end of his bed. The clothes were shabby, but well-made, Meyer judged. Dark, watchful eyes regarded him coolly. ‘Vash?’ ‘Good morning, Director.’ Vash’s voice was slow and measured. It somehow managed to sound like the voice of someone much older than the fifty years his appearance suggested, old enough to make the Director Meyer feel suddenly young in comparison. It chilled him. The blind animal panic was replaced by a deeper sense of unease. The fact that Meyer recognised the man did nothing to settle his nerves. This man shouldn’t be here, not now at this absurdly early hour. Not here alone in his private quarters without invitation. ‘Vash,’ he repeated again, more authoritatively than he felt, stalling for time. The man ignored him and busied himself by pulling a chair up, sitting and leaning forwards. Meyer had always considered Vash disrespectful of authority, as though he followed the protocols simply because it cost him so little, because he cared so little for them.

But this was something else, this was inexcusable. A furious indignation welled up inside of him, even as his mind desperately cast around for options. There was a gun under his pillow, but that was a last resort – after all, despite the rejuvenation he was undergoing, Meyer was not a young man. It wouldn’t do to panic. He had other failsafes in place. ‘This is unexpected,’ he finished at last. Those crucial three words would activate the mics and cameras installed around the room, waiting for his command. He’d always known there was a possibility that someone unauthorised might get in here, no matter how tight security was. You didn’t last this long at this level through carelessness. An alarm would already be ringing in the control room. Any minute now the guards would burst in and arrest this man. The Director Meyer smiled thinly in spite of himself. Vash would suffer for this insolence, whatever his ultimate intentions were. Vash smiled back, folding his long limbs into the chair, like a spider drawing up its legs. ‘I assume you have a good reason to break into my house like this and disturb me at this hour?’ Meyer asked, struggling to keep the displeasure from his voice. ‘Of course, Director,’ Vash replied, and then simply stopped without any suggestion that he intended to explain himself further. As though he too was waiting for something. He was a fool if he was. Any minute now, the traitor’s life would be as good as over. The silence stretched between them. It unsettled Meyer that Vash could sit here so calm. The longer he sat here, the more danger he was in, surely he must know that? Vash might have looked like an assassin, but his manner and the utterly ordinary cut of his coat and shirt suggested otherwise. He was a civil servant, not a killer. An ill-concieved coup attempt, then? A fit of madness? ‘Well?’ Meyer asked with as much nonchalance as he could muster, when the silence became unbearable. ‘I’ve come to discuss the matter of your retirement,’

Vash said, simply. ‘Now Vash, you know as well as I do that the position of Director is for life.’ Meyer had regretted his choice of words as soon as he’d said them. ‘And yet,’ Vash mused, reaching into a pocket, ‘there is a surprisingly quick turnover for the position, all things considered.’ He drew a small, cheap looking gun and laid it carefully, pointedly, on the beds footboard. Meyer swallowed, his mouth dry. Where were the damn guards? He’d have them whipped for their heaven-damned incompetence. His mind turned again to his own weapon. ‘You’re here to kill me then,’ the Director finished bluntly, as though disappointed. ‘I’d almost convinced myself it wouldn’t be something so base. But it would seem you’re no different from the rest of us – my mistake for assuming so.’ Meyer grimaced bitterly. ‘Men always struggle amongst themselves for power. Why pretend otherwise?’ Director Meyer had never had a good handle on Vash. Indeed, it appeared nobody had. Where the records weren’t absent, they were contradictory. He had no region of origin and no birth date. Normally this would have been cause for concern and the local authority or the Director Meyer himself, would have acted to ameliorate the concern. But upon questioning Vash had never shown any sign of evasion. He had once fought for a resistance movement, he openly admitted, but upon the realisation that their cause was futile he had changed sides. Once part of Arco, the global government, he had risen quickly through the ranks as his superiors realised his utility. Above all else, Vash was a competent man. He was thorough and dedicated in a way that was almost more valuable than mere intelligence, another quality he had in abundance. Vash was a man who ensured that what needed to be done got done. It had saved him from the firing squad. It had spared him in purges and violent regime transitions. And now within the byzantine hierarchy of Arco, Vash was technically just one step beneath Meyer himself.

‘I’m not interested in power,’ Vash said slowly, as if Meyer were a small child. Meyer laughed back at him. Vash had never shown the slightest glimmer of ambition as far as Meyer could remember, a trait he found reassuring in those beneath him. The problem was Vash also appeared utterly impossible to manipulate. He’d followed orders so far, but what about now? What about when the rules ceased to apply? All men had levers and pressure points, but Meyer was starting to suspect Vash was the exception to that universal law. ‘So what do you want?’ Meyer replied, eyes skirting over the expansive bed and towards the door. Where were his guards? ‘I would have thought my motives were completely transparent,’ Vash said. Meyer reflected that a completely transparent object is also invisible. As far as he knew, Vash had not accrued any vices that might be used against him. The man had no family or friends that might be threatened as blackmail, nor desires that might be leveraged as bribes. Meyer had seen straight through him, without being able to glean any insight into what made him tick in the process. He had come to assume that Vash’s governing drive was nothing more than the mental equivalent of inertia. And now here he sat uninvited, in the palace’s private quarters in the middle of the night with a gun. Clearly the Director Meyer had been mistaken about what this man was capable of. Panic once again threatened to overwhelm him. Minutes had passed – where were his security? He kept his expression blank, whilst in his head a voice screamed. ‘They’re not coming, Meyer.’ The Director felt the hairs on the back of his neck rise. How had Vash known? ‘I’m sorry?’ he asked. ‘The guards. They’re not coming. The code won’t work. A burnpulse disabled the cameras in here.’ Calm, Meyer told himself. Think. Maybe, if he just shouted loud enough he could alert the guards? The door was soundproofed so he could ‘entertain guests’ in private. But he feared that would force Vash’s hand.

After all, for now Vash seemed quite content just to sit and talk, as though he had all the time in the world. Better to bide his time and wait for an opportunity to use the gun. Even if he missed, the sound of gunshots would alert those stationed in the corridor beyond. His palms were slick with sweat. Meyer wiped them on the bedclothes. The gun mustn’t slip if he had a chance to grab it. Vash was still talking, ‘- and your mistake, Director, your mistake was in thinking that we are all as motivated by a desire for power and wealth and infamy as you. You’ve forgotten what Arco is for, why the world government was created in the first place – to keep as many alive as possible, at as high a standard of living as possible for the duration of the -’ ‘Then why did you ever oppose Arco if you think its aims so just? Or do you deny that you were once a criminal subservice?’ asked the Director. Just keep him talking… Out of Vash’s sight Meyer’s left hand fumbled under the pillow for the gun, finding the cold reassurance of its grip. He half glanced over as the girl in the bed stirred beside him. Perhaps he could use her as a distraction, get her between him and this madman? He suspected that even if Vash would shoot him the fool would balk at killing a random bystander. ‘I thought there was another choice. I was wrong.’ Vash stood, returning his own gun to a pocket and walking around to the far side of the sprawling bed, where the girl lay. He stooped, placed a gentle hand on her shoulder and woke her. This was his chance, whilst Vash was distracted. Whilst she was between them. He could discipline the guards later. If he had to kill the traitors himself, he would. The girl sat up, drawing a sheet around her, her huge mass of dark hair still tangled and reaching down to her hips. The Director Meyer seized his opportunity.

In one practised motion he tore the revolver from beneath the pillow, swung it at Vash and the collateral damage, flicked off the safety and pulled the trigger repeatedly. The weapon clicked uselessly in his hand. He looked down at the piece of inert metal incredulously, shocked that it could betray him. When Meyer looked back up, Vash was watching him, an almost indescribable expression on his face, sympathy and disgust. The girl glanced back at Meyer, grinning as she let the bullets run through her fingers onto the bed. The gleaming bullets snicked as they rolled and gathered in a fold in the bedclothes. The Director Meyer stared at them. ‘You bitch,’ he managed over a thick, dry tongue, but his heart wasn’t in it. She stood up and crossed the room wordlessly. As she opened the door a guard slumped through, a dotbow bolt buried in his neck. The girl stepped lightly over the corpse and was gone, leaving the door ajar behind her, affording Meyer a view of the empty corridor beyond. A few faint shouts drifted in from downstairs, a distant crash. How had this happened? It was all over. ‘…I’ll give you anything,’ Meyer felt his bowels start to relax and clenched, desperately. ‘Anything. Anything. I can -’ ‘I have grave doubts that you have anything material left to give me,’ Vash sighed. ‘It’s over, Meyer. I won’t kill you. I just have one request; you can retire as Director. Resign. That’s all I ask,’ Vash said, settling back into his chair. ‘They’ll kill me – I’d be dead within the month – trodden on too many – on the way up I mean – no provisions for retirement process…’ Director Meyer babbled. Vash let him finish, watching silently. Gradually the Director calmed himself. He swallowed and with a furiously shaking hand, finally let go of the useless gun. ‘Our occupiers, those who command the Earth, I don’t think they’re evil,’ Vash began. ‘At least not the way we see it. Certainly capable of it, but no more than we ever were.

Consider this – despite preemptively attacking they spared us. They didn’t want all those deaths on their conscience. But the government they created was crude and it has allowed venal, greedy men like yourself to rise to positions of power. And in ensuring that we could pose no threat, they have left the Earth a carcass, picked over by vultures.’ Whilst Vash had been speaking the Director had steadied his nerves and fear had been replaced by an anger that boiled inside of him. How dare this… bureaucrat lecture him? ‘You want me to step down…because of corruption?’ Meyer asked, unable to stop himself. ‘I guess you’re still opposed to the western campaigns as well. Are you some kind of idealist?’ Now it was Vash’s turn to laugh. ‘I’ve never been called that before, Meyer. But your waste and incompetence strains an already fragile system. We can only survive the duration of the occupation if we’re careful -‘ ‘Duration of the occupation?’ the Director shouted incredulously. ‘It’s been almost a century since the occupation began – I don’t even remember the world before and neither do you, so don’t give me that idealistic crap. That’s your justification, what’s your motivation? You’re on a mission, right – to save us all from ourselves. Do you think anything you do can make a single bit of difference? Do you even think it matters the tiniest bit who rules the world? How could any amount of tedious political power matter when they,’ he jerked his finger upwards to the blank marble ceiling, ‘own every last one of us like goddamned cattle?’ Vash paid no heed to the flecks of spittle flying from the Director Meyer’s mouth, nor did he flinch as the Director lent forwards to yell in his face. Instead he sat there, quite still, head cocked to one side as though in deep thought. The Director continued, desperate for some response, a crack in this facade. ‘You think you can do a better job, right?

The people won’t thank you for it – to them you’re just another one of us, another puppet of those above, pulling the strings, another collaborator with blood on his hands! You might not kill but it’s done in your name! You say you won’t kill me, but you know I will die anyway.’ ‘If you won’t resign then I’ll have you arrested. I have all the evidence I need -’ ‘And I’ll waste away in some frozen gulag, safely out of sight, or die en route at the hands of some thug.’ Vash didn’t respond, his expression briefly troubled. And suddenly an idea came to Meyer. Vash was a man of his word – when he said he didn’t want to kill he surely meant it. ‘I would rather kill myself here and now,’ Meyer finished, deliberately. He fumbled down for the gun, the bullets. ‘Don’t,’ warned Vash, gesturing with his own weapon. ‘I will force you to confront the consequences of your actions. And when you see me die, know that I am neither the first, nor the last that will die as a result of what you have chosen.’ He reached again for the bullets. ‘Stop,’ Vash commanded, an edge to his voice. He aimed his gun at the Director. ‘Do it, then,’ the Director Meyer snarled. ‘Show some agency, take responsibility!’ Vash let the hand holding the gun drop to his side. He walked over to the desk, his head turned away, his free hand tracing over the finely carved wood and the smooth plastic of an old, black telephone. Even in these dire circumstances a sense of impending victory surged through the Director Meyer. He had at last gained the true measure of Vash; he was a man that defined himself by the responsibility he felt to always do the right thing, a compulsion so strong that it was almost instinctive. And now it was in conflict with his utter inability to take a life, despite the knowledge that people had surely died before as a result of his actions, that thousands more would have done so had he succeeded here tonight.

People hated cognitive dissonance, being forced to confront contradictions in their own deeply held convictions. Especially people like Vash, who deluded themselves into thinking they were on the side of right. Meyer could figure a way out of this – with Vash out the picture it would not be hard to get the Enforcers now pushing through the palace back on his side. This was a pragmatic age, and loyalty was a fleeting thing. ‘What’s your plan then, Vash? What can you do?’ Meyer crowed. ‘I’ll make you an offer – leave now and take your men with you. I’ll give you three days head start, for old times sake. And I’ll name one of the conurbations after you, in honour of all the work you have done…’ The Director trailed off as Vash paused, turned, his eyes anguished, his face drawn. And at that moment the Director realised he’d never fully understood Vash at all, that there were yet deeper levels to the man, utterly inaccessible to him. He’d misjudged him for the last time. Vash strode back over to the bed, his grip around the pistol tightening, his knuckles white. Meyer scrambled backwards, the luxurious bedding tangling around him, impeding him as he tried to get as far away from Vash as he could. He backed up against the ornate headboard, pressing himself against it. Vash levelled the weapon at Meyer’s head. The Director was pleading now, a pathetic old man on his hands and knees, grasping vaguely at Vash’s free hand. ‘Please,’ his beseeching voice hoarse. ‘I’ll do anything, give you anything. But I can’t leave this compound. They’ll kill me. I don’t want to die… What can I do to dissuade you?’ He looked up at Vash, trying to meet the dark, ancient eyes above the barrel of the gun. Vash looked down, drawing on a reserve of strength inside himself to meet the Director’s searching eyes. ‘You are a liar and a murderer and a condemned man in any case. Give me another choice,’ he replied simply. And pulled the trigger. The weapon leapt in Vash’s hand, the gunshot deafening.

Director Meyer jerked violently in response, and then slowly, as though he didn’t quite dare to believe it, he opened his eyes. A hole marred the ornate headboard behind him. ‘Wha – ’ Meyer mouthed. ‘Sir, any trouble?’ came a voice from the door. Two armed Enforcers entered. ‘No, we’re done,’ Vash replied. ‘Take him to a cell. We’ll do everything properly, by the book. But he’ll pay, eventually.’ The Enforcer nodded, looking discreetly around the room. ‘Very good sir,’ then the other spoke. ‘He doesn’t deserve prison. He should die right now.’ ‘You coward… you total goddamned hypocrite,’ murmured Meyer from the floor. Vash ignored him. ‘No, it won’t do any good for our credibility. And it would be impossible to make Director Meyer suffer even a fraction of the suffering he has caused others, so what would be the point of retribution?’ ‘You sanctimonious bastard,’ Meyer mumbled. ‘Yes sir.’ One of them loaded a tranquiliser, the other loosened a pair of cuffs from her belt. ‘You can’t wash your hands of this Vash, not forever!’ raged Meyer. ‘One day you will be forced to take a life yourself, and only then will you know the true cost of leadership!’ ‘I already do,’ Vash replied. The Enforcer’s gun hissed as the dart was fired and the Director fell silent. ‘Goodnight, Meyer. I doubt we’ll ever see each other again.’ The Enforcers marched over and dragged the unconscious body from the room without ceremony leaving Vash alone with his thoughts. A shadow of uncertainty passed over his face, but there was nobody there to see it. Those above would soon know the Director Meyer had been deposed, it was just a matter of time. But even though he expected it, when the phone at last rang he jumped. He walked slowly over to the desk where the mundane, old fashioned telephone rang, filled with trepidation. He picked up, not saying anything, just listening to the wash of interference. ‘It is done, Vash, yes?’ it said at last. It almost startled him how human it sounded.

But even through the tinny speakers of the phone, Vash could hear the inflection was somehow off. As though the speaker didn’t really understand the noises it was making, forcing alien sounds through a maladapted physiology. ‘Yes,’ he replied. ‘Good. Don’t fail me Vash. Directors position is for life,’ said K’txl, the Dynic administrator of Earth. There was so much more Vash wanted to ask of it. But before he could say another word the line went dead. He gathered himself, collected his overcoat from where he had draped it over the balustrade and made his way purposefully out of the gaudy palace via the main doors to the courtyard where a vehicle waited for him. A patchwork of tiny single-person farms, grey internment blocks and gigantic conurbation arcologies stretched out before him, just another sector of the global prison that was the planet Earth. ‘Rip this mansion apart for spares,’ Vash ordered an Enforcer as he passed. ‘Demolish whatever’s left.’

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com Bows and Arrows Against the Lightning 21 - 26 minutes

The alert came through at nothing AM, a meaningless hour of coordinated universal time that I didn’t bother remembering. The alarm pierced into my consciousness along with a request for access. I hadn’t channelled any stimulants so I was still confused, still capable of being confused. The Utilitaria were asking to be let in. I didn’t have a chance to think about what it meant. Just let open a tiny crack, allowing the waiting message to trickle in until it was laid down in memory. It was a nasty trick the Utilitaria kept for emergencies – instead of feeding you fake sensory information they just altered your whole brain into the state it would be in a moment after a message was over. The entire conversation took zero actual time. ‘Alert absolute. Apathy agglomeration has exited translight in the direction of Helios, mass approximately 1 Earth, range 70AU and deceleration 40 Kilogees.’ ‘For eternity’s sake, an Earth mass moving at forty gravities?’ ‘Forty thousand gravities. We believe they have developed large scale inertial manipulation.’ ‘That’s impossible.’ ‘And yet it continues to happen. The fact remains that we are under attack and the decision has been made to counter. If you want in, now’s your only chance. Launch in forty seconds,’ said the voice of the Utilitaria, and then I was back in reality. No shock, there hadn’t been time for shock, since that little conversation had never actually happened to me. There was only numbness, and a kind of creeping claustrophobic fear. The worst thing that could possibly happen to anyone was happening right now, the berserker machines had come to Heppolon and everyone and everything here would be dead within an hour. The Apathy wanted to destroy us – nobody knew why, or even if they had a reason. Perhaps they hated humanity intrinsically, or maybe they followed some unguessable higher goal. They’d arrived a century ago and ever since we hadn’t been able to slow them down or even make them notice our defensive efforts.

We ran and died for decades, praying for the Utilitaria to find an ultimate solution. Here and now, at last, was the time to stand and resist. And I was being given a chance to join the fight. Like I’d dreamt of, like I’d been trained to do, like I’d waited here for, passing the time meaninglessly and adapting myself for the role of attack pilot. I opened my eyes groggily and saw a pale scarlet light flooding from the ceiling of my housecube. The universal alert was on. The sentience in the floor deopaqued itself, interpreting my wishes, showing a view of the Apollo shipyards glittering below my feet, the thick clouds gathering over the glittering supercontinent, lines of launch loops linking orbit and statite facilities to the surface, towering spacescrapers and arcologies. An old central world in its death throes, almost unbearably sad to watch. I shut down my link to the planetary outernet, recoiling at the backwash of terror as the news spread. People would be cramming themselves into transit capsules or jamming their heads into intrusion units, piping their minds or their bodies into the interstice as fast as possible. They needed time – even an additional minute would buy exponentially more lives than I could save any other way. Invasions were moments of heightened potential, when every decision you made could save more people than you could ever meet in a thousand lifetimes. They were not times for fear. I rolled off the bed before the stimulant program kicked in and had just enough presence of mind to run a clean program through my skinsuit, banishing the sweat and fatigue of the night with a sharp full-body electric crackle. My expanded mentality warmed up to full alertness and flagged a warning that body-scouring wasn’t good for my long term health – but, I didn’t have a long term health to worry about. I activated every short-term neural stimulant and felt the coolness seep into my thoughts, shutting down the screaming alerts.

I was as ready as anyone could be. ‘If you can get me into a ship that fast, I’m in,’ I said, after maybe a second had passed. It was reckless – I didn’t even have streaming capability, so when I died there’d be no proper continuity. But then I’d never really believed that backups were the same thing as the real person, no matter how identical their mental states. ‘We cannot transfer your mind-state in time,’ the Utilitaria said, responding to my implicit question. There was a barely noticeable pause as the most intelligent entity in the system weighed the thousands of different tasks it was having to process as the world around it ended. ‘We’re picking you up the old-fashioned way, via A-sphere. Standby for frameshift and integration.’ I was about to say something about it making a rather cruel joke when the light seeping through the transparent floor took on a noticeably different texture. I looked down as the silvered bulk of an A-sphere glided up below me with light taps of plasma thrust. The glowing lines of exotic energy lenses dimmed as it settled down from translight velocity. The smooth ovoid rotated and a docking aperture sucked itself up to meet the floor beneath me, which dilated, letting me slip through like a stone sinking into water. ‘Prepare for integration, we will be underway shortly.’ Fifteen seconds of rapid travel later I was in the only habitable space in the entire vessel, a tiny three-meter cavity lined in black carbyne, containing a single ched unit that I slid straight into. At a touch the entire system interfaced perfectly with my mind and I was underway, more than a passenger but less than a pilot. The ship could respond to any situation with infinitely finer precision than me, but someone had to be there, if only to watch humanity’s first real stand against the Apathy. This time, we had a chance.

The last A-sphere claimed its pilot, and from all across the Heppolon system the deployment orders were finalised, thirty seconds after the alert. Exchange drives lit up the neutrino spectrum as each ship started sixty-gee course corrections, adding or subtracting dozens of kilometres per second to their velocities, aligning vectors on one small region. Precisely forty seconds after the alert came through, all eight hundred A-spheres went translight, and raced towards the mustering point at very nearly the speed of light. Communications disappeared as the universe rushed away in all directions, and in that secretive bubble of space there was absolute motion, as close as anyone could come to riding a light ray. I relaxed into the ched unit and felt the intrusion fibres clamp around my brain, completing the unification. My body merged with that of the A-sphere around me and I felt the incredible power, saw in a multi-spectral kaleidoscope and understood that a vastly accelerated ghost of my mind was even now being read and absorbed into the ship, ready for battle. This was not a war fought on human timescales. The bubble of tortured spacetime evaporated away ten minutes later, dropping me into a tight formation ten thousand kilometres wide, dead on the system ecliptic and right between the system’s interstice and the enemy. We’d frameshifted right onto Heppolon’s largest militarised Rock, where the local defence forces were being prepared. A few hundred swiftships and SC-4’s, thin razor edged pyramids bracketed by bell-shaped drives, and a swarm of millions of neummanetic exo-drones. But without translight they weren’t capable of retreating, and the crew were all interstellar agency or some other military; they knew their mind-states would be below those of innocent civilians on the outbound priority list.

They were all flying to their deaths, and yet I watched through expanded senses as the pilots crammed into the lifesystems of their ships and cast off, accelerating slowly as they cleared the first few kilometres and then building to bone-crunching intensity, pushing the physical limits of how much heat ordinary matter could handle, or how much stress ordinary bodies could take. The D-spheres arrived next, thudding into solid reality after their alignment burns and translight journeys. City-sized and slightly asymmetrically curved hewn from solid monopole-enriched hyperdiamond, and powerful enough to crack planets down to their cores. They didn’t have exchange systems, and their drives lit up like suns as they accelerated away ponderously, spitting out kilotons of plasma each second. I opened up the local channels and shared a few words with the A-Sphere pilots, and the crews of the arriving D-spheres, bravado and fear warring in our minds and words. The D-sphere crews joked about us attempting loop-the-loops like ancient atmospheric fighter pilots. We told them with mock sincerity that there’d be no Apathy left to pick off after we’d finished with them. At an order from the Utilitaria we powered ahead, my mind already operating mainly outside the biological, orders of magnitude faster than normal, so that even the insane ninety-gee acceleration the A-sphere could manage with its exchange-linked vacuum drive seemed positively glacial. The first limitation on spacecraft power had been energy – energy limited drive power, which limited acceleration and delta-v. We solved that a century ago with the vacuum drive, which sucked from an effectively limitless well. Next to fall had been waste heat – that was what made the swiftships so huge and thin, what gave them the massive vulnerable gridwork of exhaust nozzle webbing and heat radiators, what limited the power of beam weapons and railguns.

We abolished that with monopole enrichment and exchange matrixes; the laws of thermodynamics were placated in an off-the-books deal, allowing us to eject waste in a form that didn’t interact. Finally came the facts of Newtonian mechanics, the irritation of having to accelerate up to a certain speed and the resultant problem of inertia. Translight obliterated that, now that you could dance along your own freefall trajectory at almost exactly the speed of light. All of that had made us invincible in the last war, and all of it together, integrated into the body of my A-sphere, might be no more than a speedbump against the Apathy. While we waited for the gigantic D-spheres to finish shifting in and adjusting their vectors into the new deployment I patched into the chatter of the local ships. In lieu of anything else, they were using conventional joust tactics – take a long run-up, accelerate into a wide firing wall, fire hyperkinetics at long range and drones and beams at close range. They would take hours to accelerate to a decent combat velocity, and the wall of Apathy was already rushing towards us at almost exactly the speed of light. It was all obsolete thinking that had failed a hundred years ago, but what else did they have? My own A-sphere started accelerating again, reaching escape velocity and piling on a good hundred kilometres per second over the next couple of minutes, drawing my freefall trajectory straight out of the system at the Apathy. The acceleration cut out – somewhere my body relaxed into its gel cushioning as the ridiculous stresses it was under disappeared. ‘You’re in the first wave,’ said the Utilitaria, along with a wordless burst of encouragement. I was too high on stimulant programs to feel anything as I went translight again, along with the first hundred A-spheres and twenty D-spheres.

The tiny patch of space covered by the accelerating swiftships disappeared behind me as my velocity multiplied a thousandfold, and ahead the solid mass of beyond-alien machinery that was arrowing into Heppolon like an icicle grew larger. The gravitational sensor view looked wrong, like nothing that should belong in this universe. Even today, we still didn’t know what the Apathy was made of – perhaps defects in the fabric of space-time itself or new forms of elementary particle. It was, to a first approximation, indestructible. ‘Check all your weapons and switch to one-time communication only,’ came the crisp orders. The Apathy were clever; it was impossible to comprehend how overwhelming their power was until you’d seen it for yourself. All of our comms were wide open to them, and exploitable. They were more than willing to communicate, but that communication took the form of anti-mind affects; what came after propoganda on the technology ladder. A few words or some brief light flashes on a screen had inexplicably driven crews insane or disrupted their consciousness in some incomprehensible manner, a simple laser burst could disable computer systems that had been proven impregnable. The machines replicated too rapidly, conjuring new energy and mass as if from nowhere. They didn’t grow or change, when useful information was needed, they would disassemble your mind atom by atom, and integrate the information fascistically, absorbing you and not changing in response. We materialised again five million kilometres ahead of the enemy, which gave us half a minute before we had to fall back. We immediately started accelerating at the physical limit of the exchange drives, dispersing at a hundred and thirty gees. The reactor converting petawatts of waste heat into neutrinos every second, keeping the lifesystem at a cool room temperature even as my ship directed its titanic energies directly into drive thrust.

Ordinary drones clanged away from the hull, mostly low-key Focussed-Antimatter devices that accelerated away on conventional drives. They were spindly pyramids, all drive and radiators with the warhead indistinguishable from the fuel. The Apathy machinery grew closer, and as the Utilitaria got a good handle on the shape and density of the cloud with mass sensors we let rip with the slashers. We realized a long time ago that ordinary matter or energy just brushed against the Apathy like wind striking rock – the densities and binding energies of Apathy-stuff were so far above that of anything we could create that only the largest energies focussed down to the smallest points would do anything at all. Kinetics at relativistic speeds could take chunks out of Apathy stuff, and the gigaton blasts of F-AMs focussed down to needle-points would do some damage too, but it was all too little, slingshots against skyscrapers. To do real damage you needed exotic physics, and that was expensive. Slashers had secondary warheads of monopoles and charged micro-singularity primaries, which was as horrendously dangerous as you’d expect. Each slasher missile cost more than an ordinary intersystem ship and our only heavy-hitter, the conversion bomb, was even more dangerous. Only ships controlled directly by the Utilitaria carried those. We jumped another five million kilometres back, ahead of the cloud, just as the first detonations registered. The blast totalled several teratons; it would have been an area-denial fleet killing attack against any normal enemy and the backwash would have destroyed even an A-sphere, if we’d been stupid enough to wait and watch. Against the Apathy, it did as well as expected – which was to say, not very well. After the next regrouping we switched to ordinary kinetics, using the railguns to place inert mass ahead of the Apathy and watching as the relativistic collisions grazed sections of machinery away.

One A-sphere waited a moment too long, and the machinery frame shifted a few grams of itself inside. The last we saw was a sharp detonation as the counter-intrusion system detected the subversion and blew the ship apart. Then, a brilliant flash lit up my artificial vision as one of the D-spheres deployed its first line of shunts, frameshifting hundred-teraton conversion bombs; weapons that released more energy than Einstein deemed possible right into the lap of the Apathy. I’d never seen that weapon used in anger before; the unfocused blast of liberated vacuum energy scoured the tip of the icicle clean, blunting the force of the attack while micro-singularities sparked their way through. Dead Apathy stuff drifted away, disconnected as its internal mechanics were disrupted by the intense gravitational gradients. The D-sphere spat a volley of conventional munitions from its railguns and I jumped ahead, barely half a million kilometres from the Apathy and fired a volley of hyper- missiles, ordinary Neummanetic exo-drones and even a few antimatter packages from my own frameshift shunt at the wounded Apathy before slipping back into translight, keeping just ahead of the assault. You couldn’t let them touch you, but if you kept ahead, kept harassing, kept throwing pure unfocused energy, you could make them pause and notice you. I triggered the vacuum drive in exchange mode and deflected sideways at thirty gees or so, frameshifting again and out of the way of a protruding tip of Apathy stuff. I ejected another pair of slashers that splattered apart and buried their way into a protruding tip of machinery, spitting hard radiation as they did. The Apathy responded with its first sign of actually noticing any human counterattack; a laser beam that burst from an ephemeral bubble on the surface of the machinery – its energy a meaningless number out in the wasteland beyond SI prefixes.

The image was greyed and sketchy, caught by a visual sensor in the last instant before the copy of my mind running the A-sphere triggered the frameshift. Two million kilometers away and off to the side of the main attack, I saw more than a dozen of the Apathy’s stellar-grade lasers, swatting at the warships as if they were gnats. Another conversion bomb exploded, and I winced as the blast enveloped one of the D-spheres. But then the huge vessel emerged from the plasma cloud, glowing hotter than the surface of the sun with a vertical kilometre of its armour gone, but still intact. Gladdened, I fired a pair of conventional drones and jumped just as it fired again, something my accelerated self said was probably a coherent gravity wave blast and a relativistic spitball of its own material. The drones scattered submunitions, fusion devices and antimatter pellets but none of them even detonated properly. Ordinary energy and force didn’t do much to an enemy made of material a dozen orders of magnitude stronger than hyperdiamond. My accelerated self, which was the one doing all the real decision-making, took that moment to dump its next package of information into my mind. The Apathy had just rammed into the system’s conventional defence fleet, soaking up more than a hundred million kinetic rounds and drones to apparently little effect. Everyone on the rock and in the slowly dispersing fleet had died in an instant. They were minutes away from Apollo, and the evacuation was nowhere near complete. We needed to do more. Seeing the chance for a distraction, I accelerated again and frame shifted for a few seconds, but somehow the Apathy shifted a chunk of machinery to barely a thousand kilometres from where I appeared and formed another graver cannon out of nowhere. The beam of shearing gravitational forces whipped around in the direction I was already evading.

Firing the primary exchange drive and the secondary drive, I dived away at two hundred gees, but the gravity shear slammed into the hull armour and my ship informed me it had lost the ability to frameshift. In response to the damage the A-sphere reconfigured its interior, neummanetics frantically replicating new components, and I regained thrust and heat rejection capacity in less than a second. It was enough time for the Apathy machinery to encircle my ship and match velocities. Microscopic shards streamed towards me, sticking to the hull. My ship flooded its exterior with hard radiation and monopole streams to shake off the infection and then, my links to the fleet and external sensors died. I felt utterly calm thanks to the total self-control imposed by my expanded mentality. Small frameshifts sent chunks of Apathy stuff mere hundreds kilometres from me, forming a tighter cordon – they were trying to assimilate me before I could trigger the destruct. Anger boiled as I realised what they had in mind, and I fired the gamma-cannons and proton lasers. The beams speared into the cloud of fast-moving black shards. The Apathy approached slowly, grazers, lasers and shards firing, and at last my expanded mentality fired the monopole railguns in point-defence mode. Trapped less than a thousand kilometres the almost static material came apart, and I accelerated away, but with the Apathy matching my manouver smoothly and perfectly. It didn’t matter – I’d brought the seconds my expanded mentality needed to modify the vacuum reactor, dismantle the exchange matrixes and set up a simple chain-reaction. I fired my last two stored singularities and emptied the antimatter reserves in a volley of unguided shells. The Apathy darted away from the singularities and the gigaton antimatter detonation did far more damage to me than to them, abrading away the monopole armour and frying the top level of sensors and close in weapons.

The ship informed me I’d lost attitude control and heat rejection, and I had about a second left until the waste heat billowed through the remaining monopole layers and melted me. The Apathy stuff formed a complete encircling sphere and then frameshifted, bringing me somewhere else. I was inside the main mass, most likely. Maybe they wanted to analyse my technology fully rather than just destroy me. It didn’t matter anymore. One microsecond before the spears of machinery pierced the hull I detonated the vacuum reactor in conversion mode. As can happen sometimes with the release of potential energy from the quantum vacuum, the yield was higher than expected. Energy poured outwards and severed the spear of Apathy machinery, detonating with enough energy to destroy every planet in Earth’s solar system. Planetary masses of material were severed and rendered useless by the blast. It was luck, arguably dumb, that the Apathy miscalculated and brought me into the heart of their machinery. I’d taken my chance, and it had paid off. When they brought my most recent copy back out of storage, I was told the Utilitaria had held the system’s interstice for eight more hours.

ascentuniverse.wordpress.com The War of all Wars 42 - 53 minutes

All the worlds that were will always have been, All the worlds within call to be made real, All the worlds without await us, The fires of the soul are great and burn with the same light as the stars. The Reflections of Seeker, translation taken from Metaphysics and the Conception of Deep Time in Xeno-Mythology (1st edition), Arco Gen-stream. Previously I The brightness tore through the warped space of the interstice less than five microseconds before the last wave of Alcubierre distortion pulses finally destabilised that connection. The final few refugee ships sprayed out in all directions, dataships burning at a hundred gees, the ones carrying the corporeal sustaining twenty, thirty, forty gees, their sedated bodies flooded with oxygen-rich fluid and ichor. Ordinary minds would have called it chaos. With a final burst of hawking radiation, the interstice folded itself into a mysteriously lightweight singularity and spat out a spherical wave of hard radiation, a heralding light announcing the coming of a god. The invader shrugged off the onslaught and went ballistic, coasting along its original vector at a few hundred kilometres per second. Sensors probed, tracing the bullet of anomalous matter. Slasher torpedoes were hurled from railguns, rushing towards the invader at hundreds of gees, laser-boosted, antimatter-driven, closing the fifty thousand kilometre exclusion zone around the interstice in three minutes. They met the thermal flash on the way in. The brightness, the invading enemy, was struck five, ten, fifteen times by monopole-doped hypervelocity projectiles that tore chunks of matter away. But then, unknowable processes within the star-bright shell of that light registered the threat and unleashed a flurry of graver spikes. They hit the missiles on the paths along which they were dodging, anticipating their moves, shredding them to less than atoms and scattering the remnants.

Then it was gone, diving away with only a faint splash of gravitational radiation to account for its kilogee acceleration. With an apocalyptic flash of radiation, the invader discarded all of its stored thermal energy, turning near black to the Universe. Further back, the minds that monitored the system resorted to graviton interferometry, tracking the faint distortion of a mass accelerating far harder than Kepler’s laws allowed for, and plotted a vector. The system confirmed no Alcubierre signature. Somewhere inside the vast and ancient Utilitaria-seeded intelligence, an internal estimator clicked over from ‘total loss of system’ to ‘military action possible’. The vector was extrapolated, and a target volume identified, a rogue planet arcing above the plane of the ecliptic. The invader might be circumventing Newton’s third law but the second still applied; there was a timetable and a potential to scratch items off the kill list. It was going there to consume mass and breed, but there was a chance to stop it. II The low edge hills curved upwards in all directions. Above me, flat world-plates circled, the wheeling flock thickening towards an omega point at the summit of the grand orrery, an uncertain few thousand kilometers above our heads. The artist who had designed this place said it was a pale imitation of their own grand orrery. I suspect this was wrong. Most likely she suffered from the typical Dynic inferiority complex – still trying to prove her species’ worth after all these centuries and locked in a personal, altogether too-human battle to achieve immortality without a Line. Our own platform was less than a kilometre across. We floated above the inexplicably bright four-axis desert. Beyond the limits of that brightness, colourful bands of cities squirmed with revellers. If I glanced at any one of the millions of others sharing this space, their personal details would unwind into my thoughts at whatever level of detail I desired and their privacy permitted.

I was relaxing in a bar which protected jauntily over the edge of the platform, its free hanging weight defying gravity and terrestrial common sense. The drink in my hand was a voguish simulacrum of some neurochem cocktail. It looked slickly iridescent and tasted of a fruit that had never existed. Most of the other partygoers were Arco types; they liked to set the intoxicant filters dangerously high, and many were slumped in chairs as the music and optics pulsed. Others had hooked their kinaesthetic shunts into something the dance jockey was casting, their bodies moving in perfect synchronicity as parts of a greater, well-choreographed whole. Most still unimaginatively wore their ISA uniforms, their collars peeled down a little to indicate informality. I scrolled through a terminal in my drink-free hand. I had dredged the specification from a local Utilitaria node; a faithful facsimile of a Corbin-era personal device, like something from a period piece set during the Consolidation. Those watching me pull it up raised their eyebrows. What can I say? I like anachronisms. The time in the top left corner displayed years, months and days to four decimal places. That was how they used to mark time in those days; months named for millennia old gods; days based on the Earth’s rotation. There is something romantic about it all. Something organic, rooted in a specific place. As I watched, the fourth decimal place after ‘seconds’ turned over, slowly. We had plenty of time. The noosphere couldn’t get enough of me. They were looping an enhanced image of a crucial moment in my most recent engagement. I watched my own A-sphere shearing out far more energy than Einstein once declared possible, slicing the black shard of invading Apathy in half. The image was only six hours old, and I was already a celebrity; the hero pilot, a mere human (albeit an augmented one, but who isn’t these days?) that had stood against a force of nature and won. I’d mattered.

The Multiplicity, Union, even some of the more rational Blights, all were on our side for once. The side of life. But we had still failed to contain them, and I had still died. That was the other thing the feeds were keen on showing – a glowing chunk of material making it through the interstice at the last moment, disintegrating wave after wave of slasher missiles and then boosting out at a thousand gees, eating sparse interplanetary gas and growing slowly and resolutely. The Apathy was here, in-system. The decision was to stand firm and fight instead of running, to buy time for the floods of dispossessed fleeing ahead of the main front. I was being thrown back into the fray, and sooner than expected. These moments were my shore leave. Thank goodness for the stretching of subjective time possible in virtuality. “Theory’s never the same as reality, is it?” said the woman leaning on my shoulder; Meira, an Arco weapons officer off the Arsonist. “Doesn’t matter how many times they tell you permanence of identity is illusory, doesn’t matter how much philosophy or neuroscience you use to try to convince yourself of it. Nothing’s going to prepare you for reading the last words you wrote to yourself before a suicide mission. First time?” “Yeah,” I said, after a pause. I dismissed the terminal from the virtual space and leaned closer in; the information I had been absorbing the old-fashioned way spooled into my expanded mentality instead. She leaned in and kissed me, trying to draw me out of myself. I could taste the oxy-martini on her breath. “It’s a mindfuck. Still, beats permadeath!” I finished glibly, knocking back the last of my drink. “And what a way to go!” “Quite the blaze of glory… ” Her expression grew suddenly serious. It suited her. “The Arsonist drew the Apathy’s attention long enough for us to squirt out the last few mind-states. Eight million saved, in total, they reckon.

That last data ship; I rammed the Arsonist into an Apathy spike – did nothing at all to the fucker, except slowed it down long enough to let the ship make it through.” She grinned again. “So I have my own heroic death to contemplate; my fourth, actually.” “Compare that to two hundred billion lives saved and get back to me,” I shot back, unwilling to be outdone. She elbowed me in the ribs and leaned in to kiss me again. “Yeah, you’re a real hero,” she said, smiling briefly. “Getting yourself killed before the messy part started and losing an A-sphere on top of that.” The throbbing music faded away as the environment reconfigured to place us in a private apartment; we sat together on a balcony overlooking the party from high above. Above us, a flat planet circled in an implausibly fast orbit. “Did you do that?” I asked. Meira nodded. She looked suddenly doubtful. “I just needed some quiet,” she squeezed my thigh, leaning closer so that her long hair slipped over my arm. I seriously doubted her hair was long in reality, but I didn’t currently own a body so who was I to talk? “You don’t mind? If you want to rejoin the others it’s -” “Why would I mind?” She didn’t answer, and we sat in silence for a time. When she spoke again, her voice was quiet. “I was there, the first time I died. There at the start of this. All the time that has passed since… system didn’t even have a proper name back then. Just a designation. That world, it felt wrong, from the moment I set foot upon it. All that smooth rock and glass, that dreadful, searing pinpoint of a sun. You could feel the eons weighing down on you, the crushing emptiness of it all. Fitting that we should find the Apathy, in a place like that.” “I’ve seen the virtuals,” I said. She ignored me, taking another long draw from her glass. “When it woke up there was no sign, no warning at all. I’m told that it took a hundred minutes – just a hundred minutes – to go from a single gram fleck in that planets’ core to full conversion.

It doubled in mass every minute or so, expanding out, consuming everything. The energies it generated were drained away near-perfectly, dissipated into some higher dimension with essentially zero telltale flux of anything, not even neutrinos. It was like the platonic ideal of a replicator, like the old fears of grey goo made more real than reality ought to allow. It even kept the mass profile of its machinery the same. Outwardly there was no sign. The worst part, they told me after I was restored.” “I didn’t know -” I said, silencing my exocortex as it rushed to fill me in on the details. “It could have killed us all the moment it initiated – it could have taken out our encampment, the research teams, everything, in less time than it took for a neuron to fire. But it didn’t, because we didn’t matter. We didn’t present any threat, so it treated us as just more condensed energy to consume. “So we just sat there, poking around like idiots while it ate the inside of the planet out like fucking maggots in an apple and then a hundred minutes later the planet exploded into black dust with no warning. Some ships weren’t targeted in the initial volley. The Apathy came hunting for them over the following minutes, tearing them apart, surgically peeling away layers of hull in search of information. I think…” Her voice cracked. She finished the glass and hurled it vaguely over her shoulder. It vanished somewhere out of sight. “I think that, from their perspective, we were hardly even real: misty clouds of electrons linked together by pinpoints of nuclear matter. Somewhere between thin fog and a hologram, insubstantial. The Apathy had no use for the silicon plate in my ship, or the carbon atoms in my body, but the kilograms of condensed energy they represented were collapsed, converted and relayed to their central node. When they absorb you, they don’t take anything of you with them – no adding your distinctiveness to their own. You’re just gone, just raw material.

I hope it was quick.” “I know it must be hard, to have fought for so long, but just look how far we’ve come,” I said, gesturing at the platform below, at the wider expanse of partygoers below them. “We’re ready to win. We can handle one thousand tons of Apathy in empty space. We have enough effective weaponry on one A-sphere to destroy it.” “They thought the same at the beginning, that it was containable, that it could be beaten. What does it even mean, to beat such a thing? You wouldn’t be dismissing it so blithely now if you’d seen what I’ve seen. I can’t describe the terror, confronting something like that, something that plays games with the laws of physics. Imagine you’re in a fight, you raise your fist, you strike that person with everything you have, and they don’t move by a fraction of a degree. Imagine the cold feeling of realising everything you believed about your own invincibility is false, that you’re an irrelevance. Nothing you can do except die.” “But we don’t have to worry about that now,” I said to her, taking her hands in mine. I materialised two glasses of wine on the table beside us. “You asked us how we beat an enemy like the Apathy. We buy time, and each time we buy a little more, until one day we find we have as long as we need. All the while, life finds a way, as it always has.” I raised my glass, prompting Meira to do likewise. She smiled stiffly. “You know we’re going to win? Well then, you trust the Utilitaria more than I do.” That sentence alone would have marked her out as Arco. I took another sip of the wine. It tasted perfect, of course. I felt the smooth sensation of goodwill it evoked, and smiled at her, leaning away a little. “It’s not trust. They can make mistakes, but not ones we can anticipate.” “They didn’t anticipate the Dyn. Or the Apathy. Seems to me they’re not so faultless after all.” “Black swans exist.” “Spoken like a true believer,” Meira hammed up the slight slur in her voice as she recited the famous words.

“The Utilitaria were a necessity. The systems we create outgrow us and supplant us. The only permanent solution is to build a system which loops back to us, which embodies value perfectly. We must wrench human history off its natural course and thread the needle of possibility. We must apply pressure again and again, to preserve human value.” “So, you want to break free?” I asked, in a similarly jesting tone. We clinked glasses, and she moved in closer, the sparring match over. “I never said that,” she said, then paused. “Honest now – doesn’t any of it bother you? I’m afraid of it, I think everyone is. But if you are then you hide it very well. You, the other you, ran your ship right up the Apathy fleck, needling and poking that thing like a hornet stinging an elephant. You did it without any hesitation. I just don’t get it.” I thought I noticed something in her face, then – the soft ultraviolet illumination made her difficult to read, but was there a blankness, or some deeper level of distress buried beneath her appearance? I considered replaying it, then rejected that thought. We both had enough on our minds. I tried to think of an honest answer to her question. “The Apathy, they’re a formidable enemy. I know each battle is probably going to be my last and that does keep me up at night sometimes. But we’re all pawns. I have got my part to play, and so I’ll play it.” “Ah, the loyal soldier,” she whispered, wrapping her arms around my neck and drawing me closer. “You play it well.” The forgotten glass in my free hand fell to the floor, splashing out its unreal wine. We still had about ten subjective hours, and we had wasted enough on brooding already. The virtuality simply skipped to the next morning once the last of the revellers had turned in for the night, all our mindstates refreshed to optimal.

The trippy cosmology had folded away, replaced with a dull cityscape, rank upon rank of slab-like barracks, reflecting the true nature of this place; a military staging ground. It wasn’t the most subtle way to tell us to ready ourselves and free up their computational resources for the coming fight, but it served its purpose. Meira winked out of existence as soon as she woke beside me, sheepishly and with only a glance in my direction. Whilst I dressed, I considered breakfast, but I had an itch to be back in the fray. The achingly slow neurons in the organic parts of my brain were awaiting their update. I had duties to perform and briefings to attend. Just like our ships, I had to be made anew for the next engagement. Our constellation elements were eight minutes from frameshift, still fabricating new weapon hardpoints and taking on supplies. That gave plenty of time for the x-beams to funnel in a few exabytes of essential and completely irrelevant information. My exocortex informed me the training process would take seven subjective weeks, with nineteen years of memory directly plated in. Everything from acausal ethics to military history to game theory. When you have the Apathy cornered for the first time in human history, they have a reason to turn clever and you don’t take chances. It also politely notified me that Meira would be attending two of the same briefings; the first in two subjective weeks’ time. I winked out of existence as well, and the virtual environment closed itself off. In a gee-tank somewhere deep in the heart of a newly arrived D-sphere, my newly grown physical eyes opened to blackness for a single unsettling moment, only to close again as I was thrown into another, less extravagant virtuality, then another, then another, subjective weeks of training, briefings and longer intervals of direct mindstate alteration. The Helios system defence constellation was readied in record time.

In just a few real minutes, they vanished with a burst of frameshift-drive distortion, chasing the Apathy slug. The battle would come only when it had decelerated to meet them. III Perturbations spread through the Lorentzian manifold that represented spacetime, dancing just below the light barrier as they skated along distortion waves towards the drifting rogue planet that was the destination of the Apathy fleck. They could conjure energy from somewhere. The methods the Apathy used weren’t anything like our vacuum-decay sinks, being practically heatless, both in basic operation and in their conversion of matter to energy. Those who studied such things suggested there was an interface sunk deep into higher dimensions, past the anti-de-sitter layer theorised to shield our universe from such effects. The waste heat was going somewhere, so the thin trickle of heat their operating machinery produced was merely the faintest spillover of a vastly more energetic process, but it was dense enough to track with the most sensitive sensors. This Apathy fleck didn’t frameshift – the spatial discontinuities it surfed exchanged momentum in the usual way, accelerating it at five thousand gees. No human-built craft could hope to match that, but with frameshift, they did not need to. Acceleration and deceleration were so slow and wasteful, compared to the alternative. The fragment configured itself for fast travel, taking the form of a needle that almost resembled a human-built interstellar craft; a spear pointed at its target, infinitely black and two meters long. Even without consuming more mass, it was easily the match for our squadron of A-spheres. Even without its weapons, it could have wiped out every ship in a conventional battle constellation.

Behind the Apathy, the orbiting fabricator arrays and statite manufactories of Helios had been repurposed, churning out munitions and material for the war effort, bottling antimatter stockpiles and firing them out as fast as the F-AM warheads could be produced. Further out, the system’s stock of strategic warseeds toiled; from bases deep in the Oort came reams of conventional relativistic missiles and vast clouds of macrons, hurtling along week-long tracks through the system, converging on a single target volume, timed to arrive in waves. The terms of the engagement were simple; the Apathy fleck in its current state, a dense nugget of spatial fields and collapsed-state matter, was not capable of winning in a straight-up fight. If it could successfully assimilate a planetary mass it would transition from threatening to invulnerable. Experience, beginning with that long-ago first encounter, had demonstrated that the process would take between fifty and seventy minutes. The nearest sources of mass to the interstice had been the bodies of the Helios system proper, not a distant captured rogue planet but an industrialised system on a war footing was no easy target, not even for the Apathy. Petawatt phased-array lasers, floating statites armed with quench guns and antimatter missile batteries; they would provide enough of a roadblock to catch the fleck in time for the real fighting force to arrive. So whilst they might be an attractive concentration of condensed energy (for that was all baryonic matter is to the Apathy) we had determined the Apathy’s optimal destination. It would decelerate from relativistic speeds to a relative few hundred kilometers per second, plough into the world at this comparatively sedate speed, and begin its feeding frenzy from there. But we had put ourselves in the way. The Apathy sped towards us, minutes from engagement range, and far behind came wave after wave of conventional missiles.

Careful design of the exotic energy mirrors had produced frameshift shunts capable of generating a metastable exotic energy field, one that was able to sustain Alcubierre metric for just over three seconds before it evaporated – giving an effective range of just under one million kilometres. Alcubierre torpedoes were still under development; long-range torpedoes armed with frameshift drives were hugely cost-ineffective to operate. There were no chances taken. The instant we arrived over the rogue planet, one of the two D-spheres fired a single surface-penetrating F-AM. The detonation, just under five gigatons, drilled a deep molten hole into the cold sub-Martian world. It was just a prelude. Two conversion bombs tore through the gap, inertial fields shoving the molten rock aside, holding the warheads together until they’d penetrated into the worlds’ core, set to detonate if a delay code was not received. The railguns thudded out a ribbon of ten precious charged singularities, each one a minor miracle of spatial engineering; they would swarm in tight orbits through the world’s core forever, ready to sting the growing fleck if it ever made it that far, poisoning the tempting meal. Destroying the planet outright was barely feasible – statistically if we had used our entire supply of conversion bombs, one would be far enough off the end of the power-law distribution to unbind the world. I’d pulled a similar trick against the Apathy in our last battle. The problem was the aftereffects of a shattered planet could be almost as destructive as the Apathy threat itself – the shower of yottatons of debris, the radiation flash bright enough to cause third degree burns across the inner system. There were no half measures when the battle was joined; the fleck finished its hard deceleration burn about ten million kilometers away, wobbling and jouncing. The D-sphere quench batteries were fired in ripple mode, sending out streaks of laser-boosted kinetic rounds.

It was cover; one round in a hundred concealed a monopole bundle or a pellet of collapsed state matter. A random three or four contained singularities; it was probably just paranoia that the randomising of the weapon loadout wasn’t entrusted to a software RNG, but one seeded by the precise counts of a radiation sensor in a secondary drive tube. The Apathy knew things they had no possible way of knowing. Their fleck would have to evade or shoot down every missile. It could approach within range of the frameshift shunts and short-range slasher torpedoes, take its chances to claim its meal or return to Helios and face down the large and increasing wave of offensive hardware heading its way. If it tried to run, the A-spheres would jump to short range and frameshift as many conversion bombs as it took to finish the invader off. One by one, the incoming projectiles began to wink out; the Apathy’s graver spikes shattering them, aimed with impossible accuracy, yet again knowing the evasion patterns before they were executed. It didn’t matter; for each missile shot down, the fabricators churned out another. The lasers could boost them to nearly match the evasive acceleration. IV A whistle sounded as I strode onto the bridge of the universal treaty Defence Sphere Ultimate Height, flagship of the hurriedly reassembled Helios system defence constellation. It was unreal, of course; we were all inside cocoons beneath a kilometer of hyperdiamond armour. The display could not ever exist, because a single glance at any tactical readout would unspool far more data than could ever be contained on a single screen pane directly into the mind of the viewer. The ergonomic chairs in a semicircle, the 22nd century style terminal screens, it was all a decent UI for a virtual environment, accessible to almost anyone from any military culture.

Fully tooled-up military operatives could do without the UI, merging their bodies and thoughts with the ship directly, as I had done when I fought the last battle alone. But D-spheres had multiple crew members, usually drawn from several cultures, and not all allowed the kind of deep intimacy between man and machine necessary for this. So, compromise it was. I took my seat in the captain’s chair and glanced at the forward view screen; the pseudo-hologram unfolding itself within my mind, and I was instantly as omniscient as I cared to be, knowing the status of every projectile, the increasingly futile evasive manoeuvres of the Apathy weapon. The officers manning their own banks of unreal displays saluted me as I sat, then returned to their posts. Ahead of me, the noose of projectiles tightened around the dark spot that was the enemy. “The intruder just dropped in mass by eight kilograms. Tracking now,” reported Meira from the weapons station. Hu, the sensory officer beside her, had assumed a near-human form for convenience, though the grey-purple colouration of his skin and odd bony structures in his anatomy gave his true identity away. Dyn – prideful as ever. Those two had not melded well in training, for unclear reasons. They communicated with each other only when they had to. The screen informed my mind directly that the thousand-ton fragment was indeed slowly leaking mass. Spikes of material were being ejected, a few grams each, too small for even the Apathy to include a spatial discontinuity drive. They moved by expelling cold mass at near lightspeed, tiny milligram specks of themselves sprayed out in clouds. How they did that was just another mystery; no Apathy machinery had ever been seen emitting large-scale electromagnetic fields. But that mass range, finally, was in the realm of what conventional weapons could reliably deal with. A simple saturation bombardment with antimatter and stellar lasers would turn the microgram dust to nothingness.

The gram needles were our problem, aimed at us, thousands of them accelerating at thousands of gees. Simple kinetic energy would make them lethal. Monopole PDCs lit up, the tiny pellets of superheavy particles zipping to meet the oncoming enemy projectile swarm. They were hard to track, emitting almost no heat, but our sensor nets managed it, just about. One making it through to the planet behind us would start the exponential growth curve nightmare all over again, one striking our hull was game over for us. “PDCs are holding at replenishment rates,” Meira informed us. The stocks of monopoles held steady, vacuum sinks condensing new ones out of the active nothingness of quantum fields as quickly as they were fired. Our slasher missiles continued to close, and the spikes sought them out and tore them up, expending themselves in the impact. This fleck didn’t have an Apathy laser weapon, which was just as well. At this range evading it would be impossible. The fragment was still losing mass. At this rate, it would be completely gone in under five minutes; presumably some cold Apathy mind had determined that, as unlikely to succeed as this strategy was, it was still the best one they had. It wouldn’t give up, but then neither would we. Then the sensors whited out. “What just happened?” someone demanded. A grid had appeared ahead of the Apathy fleck, dancing lights splayed out across hundreds of thousands of kilometres. Its total power output was insubstantial, barely bright enough to cause damage a kilometre above its surface. “Enhance.” The display on the main screen refined itself. The most probable generator was milligram specks of Apathy material splayed out, holographically reproducing the light. It would jam some of the optical sensors but nothing more. The sensor precision clicked up a notch while six more slasher torpedoes penetrated the grid, which remained fixed in place. “I hesitate to attribute any motives to it,” said Meira.

“But it looks like they’re growing desperate. Trying to scare us off.” Pixels materialised in a great array, like the grid of an old-fashioned screen. The grid completed itself, turning a flat sheet, so large that the light emitted from its corners had to be delayed by almost a second to reach our armada simultaneously. The sensor view enlarged. “Full analysis. It may be the start of a large-scale energy release.” A wall of light? Just ordinary light? “Unlikely to be a direct attack,” said the sensory officer. “The total thermal power output is still in the terawatt range. A lightshow, nothing more. Maybe it really is meant to spook us. If it starts flashing medusa patterns the siren filters should catch it automatically.” The grid of glowing light was replaced by letters. “This is not real. You have been simulated – once and then again and again, covering all variations. You are hostage.” No time to react, even in this accelerated timeframe. The letters were already replaced with an array of images. Each one contained the same faces, our faces, repeated with minor variations over and over. They were speaking, as we were, and the Apathy had helpfully subtitled. It wasn’t a comm transmission, for those were all jammed and one-time encrypted, it was just there, physically, with thousand-mile high letters and faces, photons ripped out of nonexistence and splayed out to send a message that we could not unsee. “What am I seeing?” “Who are they?” “Get that message away from the displays. Forget about it, now, everyone. Take an amnestic if you have to.” The voices repeated themselves endlessly with minor variations like a Chinese whisper, and our wonderful display arrays enabled me to apprehend the words instantly. The faces were us, the crews of ships like the Ultimate Height, displayed on video messages from a million – what? Parallel universes? Simulated universes?

I saw my own face and Meira, and the few other officers on our virtual bridge, reproduced in holographic clarity, refreshed, and updated a few thousand times faster than normal, in sync with our own accelerated environment. There were variations in the images, slight differences of console layout or appearance, but they were us. One glance into my own eyes was enough to confirm it. I was frightened, as they were there. “Memetic attack! Get it off our screens,” someone demanded, futilely. We weren’t real, and we knew it. We were always vaguely aware of this sort of risk, but a basic siren filter wouldn’t catch something like this, and the Apathy had never tried it before. The software defences could filter out anything that might be a message, encrypt all ship-to-ship comms with one-time encoding, but they couldn’t protect the ship’s higher systems from anything the Apathy might project at us. Which was to say – they could if we wanted to fight a battle deaf and blind and insensate. We could have flung dumb missiles at the Apathy, or low-intelligence drones, but we’d taken a risk and opened ourselves up to attack. Any piece of software smart enough to recognise organised information beamed at them from the Apathy was a wide-open vulnerability in itself. We were the Utilitaria’s way of fighting this war at arms-length, a compromise – beings of limited intelligence and a correspondingly limited cost if they were assimilated; they wouldn’t risk exposing a full node to the Apathy. The bet hadn’t worked out in their favour. The demands pulsed ahead of us, written on thousand-kilometre-high glowing holographs, the conditions of the trap. “Your existence has been simulated over a million times.” There were audible gasps and groans. The others on the screens were getting the message at the same time; visible shock and dismay washed over them in a wave as the light delay passed.

“If any one of you surrenders yourselves to us, all unreal others will be permitted to live to completion in perfect safety, in a world indistinguishable from reality. This offer stands until the very last moment of our existence. If you withhold fire, even for a moment, even if you have almost destroyed us, you will be permitted to live in perfect peace and freedom; all but the one in a million who is real. They will die, of course, upon surrendering to us. But you are not real – to a statistical certainty. Nothing you do matters.” “No,” said someone far away. I thought it might have been Hu. The Apathy’s demand finished. “Understand what that means; you are not in the world, you are already trapped, you have already lost. Surrender – do not die for no reason. Do not suffer for no reason.” Some people might have reacted with disbelief. “We have to find out if we’re the real ones,” Meira demanded, standing up from her unreal data-desk. “There will be some hint, there always is. The Apathy can’t have recorded our life history perfectly, there will be a join where they made the copy -” “No,” I said quietly. The rest of the bridge crew nodded along sadly, seeing the arguments conclusion in a flash. “You’re right, they didn’t scan our real selves perfectly, how could they? But they didn’t need to. A million lies swamp the truth. Our life histories are wrong since they aren’t omniscient. But they are still plausible. I remember growing up on the Sirius worldring. Was that real? It certainly feels real.” I called up an image of a hoop of glittering motes surrounding a white star. The Sirius worldring imaged from above the ecliptic, home to ten trillion people, and to me, once upon a time. “And it is real, surely,” I said, wonderingly. “There’s limitless physical evidence. But all that evidence is fake too. My mind is fake, the life I led is fake. Maybe it’s almost identical to the real me or maybe it’s utterly different. “The details of them out there,”

I gestured to the grid of faces. “They’re different from each other in all sorts of subtle ways. But that doesn’t matter. When you can’t tell a convincing lie, you don’t even try. You can drown the truth with a million weak falsehoods instead. Isn’t that right?” It was an eerie reminder of the determinacy of thought. I zoomed in on one face at random, one of mine. He was saying the same things, in almost the same tone of voice. I waved a hand, caught the other me’s eye, and smiled sadly. He knew he wasn’t real too. I didn’t doubt that the threat was genuine; the compute power something like this represented was far below the bekenstein computational bound for something the mass of the invader, and if we were right that the Apathy skirted that limit, this might not even be difficult for them. “There is always a chance that we are real, no matter how slim.” “There is,” I said sadly. “But almost nothing in your life is known with this degree of confidence. Of all the beings who remembered being me and you, and fighting this battle, only one out of a million is real. A million to one odds of being wrong… that’s knowledge if anything is.” “So what do we do?” said Meira. She laughed humourlessly. “We could take a vote, ask all the other ones out there?” “We fight,” I snapped, turning back to the screen. “We do our duty, because if we do, that means the real ones will, as well.” As I watched, the next wave of slasher torpedoes continued to close in. Our parallel others had all pressed the advantage, too, as if we could win, as if the Apathy really were out there and our weapons were real physical things, capable of harming them, not a figment of some dreaming intelligence. We had to keep up the pretence – that was the whole point. Because someone out there was real. They must not give in to the blackmail. The Apathy fleck’s defensive blasts were finally overwhelmed. A sparking singularity struck the needle’s flank. It was dying.

I’d never really hated them until now – but in this moment, knowing that we were doomed, that nothing we could do would stop the Apathy from cutting our simulation short, I wanted to make them burn, to shatter those near-invincible black machines with my own hands. Why were they doing this? Why was our end so important? I saw our other faces make the same choices; they could see us too, and they were continuing to press the attack – the Apathy’s plan was not working. Were we more stubborn than their models predicted, or had they known that this, too was unlikely to succeed? The Apathy’s screen faltered momentarily. “Possible that you are right,” interrupted Hu. “But, finally, the Apathy treated us as equal… ” “No,” I replied. “We already have our orders. Anthropic traps are to be ignored, standard protocol. It might be the first time the Apathy have tried this but there are still rules. We might not be real, but we are still soldiers all the same.” “Yes, I know that,” he replied. “But think about what is happening here and now. For the first time in this entire war, the Apathy is trying to negotiate. It is offering us something, it’s talking. Maybe a real mind inside its machinery has finally woken up. We can ask it why.” “Why what?” “Why it wants to exterminate us. Why it’s doing any of this. We aren’t useful to them, we’re not even made of the same stuff. They don’t need us, and they aren’t some rogue replicator, expanding mindlessly. They want to kill us; don’t you want to know why?” We all knew that was the deepest of mysteries, the bottomless question that had defined our lives for the past century. An answer was tempting. “That gives them a vector for a medusa attack. Opening a comm channel is -” “No, it doesn’t,” Meira said. “We can do what they did; project a big hologram, apply the standard filters. If the Apathy could get a virus through those, they would have done that instead of this… simulation capture.” “But what would the point be?” I demanded.

“We aren’t out in space – we’re in that thing, we’re simulated. We can’t tell anyone.” “But if we were real, that’s what we would do. And that’s the rule, isn’t it? Everything is real; believe in it, and your real self will as well.” It had sounded so sensible in training but now it felt like a prayer. Still, we wouldn’t disobey our orders. I hadn’t been chosen for this only to be so reckless. “Okay,” I said, after a moment’s hesitation. If we weren’t real, then our minds were wide open to the Apathy machinery running them. At that moment, for all I knew, I could be an unconscious puppet of the Apathy, propaganda imaged and projected to my real self. If your own ability to reason is in doubt, then nothing is known. Maybe the real me was being shown fake images of compliant simulated copies. Maybe there was never even a war, and the Apathy were just torturing us in some distant hunk of computronium. Maybe all of human existence, from beginning to end, was a lie. No, I resolved – questioning your own decisions like that led nowhere. The real me would want this me to trust my own judgement, and my own judgement said it was worth the risk. “Destruct all torpedoes in flight. Continue to use PDCs against their incoming projectiles, and project a hologram in the same format as theirs. They clearly know all about us already, so just hook the subtitles up to me.” It was a minor breach of protocol, but an allowable one. I didn’t care. If I was about to die or be dumped into some abyss of impossible suffering, or otherwise punished for breaking the Apathy’s terms, I was going to get some answers. Projectors, freshly modified from X-beam turrets intended for terminal defence, congealed under the outer armour of the Ultimate Height, emerging from ports in its hull. They winked on, and my words appeared inscribed as kilometer-high letters, feeble and small compared to what that tiny fleck could achieve.

A thousand tons of Apathy machinery, out of the planetary and solar masses of the stuff we’d sealed off at the last incursion – the scale of it boggles the mind. “We have ceased offensive action and offer you a chance to explain yourselves. Why do you want to destroy us?” I noticed, idly on a secondary screen, that most of my alter-selves had made the same choice. Message holograms sprung up in front of their screens too. Statistically, the real me had probably made the same choice, the one who could speak to the rest of humanity. The one who had a chance of living. Then the grid of faces vanished, replaced with the Apathy’s words. We chose their name well; there was no fanfare, no dramatic rhetorical flourishes, just the awful banality of a mind that couldn’t care. “That information cannot be given.” “Why not?” “There is a risk.” “What possible risk could there be in you explaining your motives? To whom?” “The risk is to all that is conscious and by extension, to all that lives and dies.” “We are going to die anyway. Why not just tell us?” There was no reply. “Am I speaking with a real mind, or is there no-one home?” Still nothing. It was stalling in a way that might get past the filters. Anger boiled, and I broke contact. “Enough! Target that thing with conversion bombs, set each for unbounded initiation. I want it gone.” It was done in moments, sensors and weapons turrets retracting beneath the skin of the energy lenses. Exotic energy crackled and flared as we went translight for a moment, diminishing the range to something doable. “How will we know if we are the real crew?” asked Meira as we streaked through the non-space of frameshift. Her voice cracked a little. I smiled weakly at her. If I had implied before that I was without fear, then I had lied. The Apathy scared me, same as it did everyone. I was always just better at hiding it. “The real crew will be the ones who survive even if they do destroy the Apathy.

The Apathy wouldn’t reward their own destruction – that’s the entire point of this exercise. If we’re still alive in five minutes, then we’re not simulated.” “But we won’t be?” she said. “We won’t be.” We frameshifted forwards, taking us to within range of the fragment. It immediately began firing on us, its field projectors taking our armour apart on a subatomic level, slicing through the hyperdiamond as though it wasn’t there. We wouldn’t last five seconds at this distance, but we only needed three. We released our payload as damage reports blossomed in my mind. The Ultimate Height reeled under the blows, Apathy fragments overwhelming our PDCs. The hull defences engaged, cauterising any spreading infection with cleansing bursts of exotic particles and gamma radiation. Thirty conversion bombs streaked towards the fragment. It was making a valiant effort to fend them off; huge exotic energy pulses disrupted the frameshift bubble around one, scattering it uselessly into space. That was a miracle in its own right, never before seen and not conventionally possible. The first bomb exploded at point-blank range; teratons of randomised energy glowing like a second sun, ablating away the fragment, breaking it in half. Still it kept accelerating, even as the second bomb exploded. The others were milliseconds away. “I don’t think the Apathy were lying,” said Meira. “Why would they? There is a risk to us knowing their purpose.” I glanced over. She gazed back, a blank, oddly beatific expression on her face. Like she’d seen this coming. “Can’t be worse than -” V In the real, the attempted Apathy incursion in the Helios/Apollo binary has failed, the first unambiguous victory of the war. A single Apathy fragment massing perhaps one thousand tonnes managed to make it through before the interstice was collapsed.

Boosting far out of the system’s ecliptic and heading for a rogue planet, the fragment’s goal was obvious – all it needed was mass, any kind of mass, to consume and replicate. Immediate evacuation was recommended. This recommendation was ignored, and a force of a dozen A-spheres and three D-spheres was dispatched to intercept the fragment and destroy it. En route, the Apathy transmitted messages. They explained a deadly and dangerous anthropic trap. The crew of the improvised battle constellation in pursuit had been simulated a few million times, and only one could be real. They were ordered to break off or die, pointlessly, in a simulation. The battle was won regardless. The valiant crew of the Ultimate Height and its escorts resisted the attempt at blackmail before a brief and cryptic exchange with the fragment. They destroyed it, leaving them to ponder the existential implications as they limped back home on a long, slow brachistochrone trajectory.
