# com Starwhisp

Starwhisp 33 - 42 minutes

 

 
 
 

 20th of July There was something wrong. It took my groggy mind a few moments to isolate the feeling, collapse the vague anxiety down to a specific point. The numbers blinking on the bulkhead overhead swam into focus, and my eyes fixed on one particular number. The date was too early by far – we were still 10 AUs from our destination and my body not fully grown when the ship brought me to reluctant consciousness. It assures me I’ll suffer no adverse effects, although I can’t say I’m looking forward to going through puberty again, even if it’ll only last a week or so. I’m back to basics here – pure vanilla human being if you ignore the weird cocktail of exotic biochemicals the Starwhisp is pumping through my system to forcibly accelerate the growth of my new body. A better equipped medical capsule could have given me a proper network of implants but there wasn’t room for one in the mass budget, so I’m stuck with nothing more sophisticated than a microcell insert in each eye and ear – I can hear the ship talking to me, feel and see the solid illusions it projects, but not much more. The Starwhisp had all but roused itself from its own one-hundred and eighty-six year long slumber when I regained consciousness. I dragged myself lethargically out of the chamber, into chambers still being expanded and only recently pressurised, every gram sieved from local space. The same went for our own bodies – why send intact humans weighing dozens of kilograms along with all the ancillary garbage of life support and cold-sleep facilities? Much more efficient to send zygotes, super-accelerate their growth, feed them using food processed from local matter and shape the developing brains according to a stored template, placing old minds into new bodies. The process had side effects – my own memories were blurry and affectless, and I didn’t think all my motor skills were quite matured. The light of the axial corridor stung my newly grown eyes. I imagined the AI resenting these wasteful changes to a mission plan optimised for efficiency, before reminding myself it could experience no such feelings. It did only what it deemed necessary, but it turns out there are some contingencies impossible to plan for. For the first time in one-hundred and eighty-six years the Starwhisp needed a man in the loop. I made my way wearily up the axial corridor at the ship’s prompting, towards a room buried as deep as was possible within Starwhisp’s spindly frame, one of the few permanent structures along the ship’s spine. We called it the bridge, as a concession to naval tradition. ‘Where the hell are we?’ I said slowly, coughing up a few spots of tank fluid as I pulled my way up the ladder that ran along the ship’s spine. The icons in my virtual vision were mostly blank, but the voice of the ship came out loud and clear, piped directly into my auditory canals. ‘Decelerating towards Tau Ceti at full thrust. I’m glad to say the antimatter drive is working at full power. All stored personalities and zygotes are intact and all ship systems are functioning optimally; we’re ten AU’s out.’ ‘Any particular reason to wake me up now?’ ‘Just head to the bridge, I can brief you there.’ That didn’t do anything for my confidence. The bridge had been an afterthought – under what circumstances would any human be able to fly the spacecraft more competently than the controlling AI? It was a big meeting room with couches set around a plastic table and screens along the walls. The most unimaginatively designed place I’d ever seen; everything optimised for lightness in a ship that had to hurl the contents up to a fraction of light speed and then slow back down to a halt. My immature body flopped down into the conference chair and I pumped the lever underneath, raising the chair up until I could see over the table. My arm ached, as the muscle hadn’t ever been used before, and when I looked down I saw the body of an anaemic child. ‘So, what joys does the future bring?’ I asked, trying to sound light. ‘Several days ago I detected something that registered like a black hole on the mass sensors. It wasn’t a black hole. Removing a lot of guesses and caveats, I’m forced to conclude that the object ahead of us is artificial.’ Another drop of tank fluid dribbled out of my dumbly gaping mouth. The projector on the table winked on, showing the ruler-straight trajectory of the Starwhisp as it decelerated around Tau Ceti, zooming in to show a dodecahedron of glowing lights surrounding a milky pool of darkness. More points of light surrounded it. My fingers whitened around the chair armrests and ice filled every nerve as I felt the same terror that Stone Age tribesmen must have experienced when the first colonial armies rode over the horizon. This was beyond me. ‘A wormhole,’ I breathed. ‘You’re talking about an artificially sustained wormhole. And what are those lights?’ ‘Spacecraft,’ said the Whiplash, and I thought I heard awe in its dull electronic voice. ‘They are inert, emitting in the infrared only, but each one is between two and five hundred metres long.’ My new body convulsed and I retched, banging my head on the table. Bodies had their own influence on thought processes and my immature brain clearly wasn’t well suited to events of universe-shattering importance. Here I was, in the body of a child and a dozen lightyears from home, about to meet a civilisation that might be a million years older than we were. ‘I woke you because certain decisions need to be made,’ the Whiplash was continuing. ‘We came here to start a colony but I assumed you wanted to divert.’ ‘You assumed correctly,’ I said, getting my breathing under control and relaxing my death-grip. What was the first thing I had to do right now? ‘We need more information, no matter what we decide to do next. Drop some sensors ahead of us and see if we can intercept any communications.’ My mind reeled with the possibilities – how could we even relate to a species that seemed so advanced? Just how extensive was their interstellar civilisation? Humanity wasn’t ready for this and I certainly wasn’t, but it was happening all the same. ‘Which colonists do you want to quicken?’ the Starwhisp said, after a pause. ‘What?’ ‘I assume you don’t want to face first contact alone. We have ten days until we decelerate alongside the wormhole. That’s enough time to force-grow another two bodies. We can’t run any more personalities in virtual; the facilities won’t be ready by then. So who do we pick?’ I jabbed my finger at the image of the wormhole. ‘We need a physicist, if we want any hope of understanding how that works. And someone who understands biology, social structures, languages – that sort of thing,’ I said. ‘Whoever it is, they’re about to become the human race’s first xenobiologist, and good luck to them.’ I leant back into the chair and sighed. Hopefully my body would be fully grown by the time we arrived. 1st August I pulled myself up the access tube into the bridge and nodded at the teenaged forms of Dreyfus and Grey, our contact expert and resident physicist. Not the most exciting or the most qualified team for the most pivotal moment in human history, but we could do worse. Grey had a twitch underneath his eyebrow where a bundle of nerves hadn’t matured quite right and Dreyfus had forgotten he needed to start shaving. The wisps of beard made my gaze wander over his face as Grey explained what we’d discovered over the last ten days. ‘Frankly, I don’t understand any of it. We expected the aliens to detect us almost the moment we approached, since it would be well within our own capability to do the same. We’re barely a million kilometres from the wormhole and as far as I can tell they’re still ignoring us.’ ‘I don’t find that surprising,’ Dreyfus interrupted. ‘Why would they care about primitives who can’t even manipulate the fabric of the universe?’ ‘Maybe they don’t care about us, but if we announce our presence too loudly they’ll realise we happen to be made out of atoms they need for something else,’ I said. My voice still sounded strange in my own throat. Each day it was subtly different, but at least I now had the body of a twenty year-old. ‘If they’re that fantastically advanced, they’re not making good use of it. Just look at their ships,’ said Dreyfus, waving his hand to adjust the projection. The image of the alien ship was muddy and washed out, but it looked pretty recognisable. There was a flared base through which bell-shaped nozzles protruded and a sharp knife-edged tip surrounded by a bundle of tubes. ‘That really doesn’t look like the artefact of a fantastically advanced alien species,’ said Grey. ‘It looks crude and utterly conventional. The radio traffic we intercepted points to the same conclusion.’ ‘I didn’t know you’d intercepted any messages,’ I said. ‘We spent hours trying to decode their transmissions; all wasted, as it turns out they’re using unencrypted radio to transmit audio signals. We’re making slow progress with the language but it’s very simple and repetitive – most of it’s about as complicated as a four year-old’s speech,’ said Dreyfus. ‘It’s almost as if they don’t have digital electronics. But I have isolated a sample of the language.’ Dreyfus waved his hand and a harsh fizzing filled the room, interspersed with clicks and whistles. It sounded like a wasp trapped inside a flute. I tried to imagine what sort of breathing arrangement produced a noise like that, and failed. We all listened for a few moments before I broke the silence. ‘That’s not the only thing that doesn’t make sense. Think about where we are – barely twelve light years from Earth. It’s not far in galactic terms, so why didn’t we see evidence of a vast interstellar domain? Why isn’t this star system filled with the alien machines? It shouldn’t matter how alien you are, you still need resources to achieve your goals. Instead, we have this one little outpost right outside a wormhole. And what are the odds that they’ve just arrived at the same time we have?’ ‘Maybe they don’t have economics as we know it,’ said Gray, trailing off. ‘No, I don’t buy it. If they didn’t care about expansion they wouldn’t be out here in the first place.’ The mystery didn’t get any clearer as we manoeuvred closer in.  Dreyfus worked around the clock with the Starwhisp’s AI and managed to extract a few meaningful units from the alien language – phrases at the start of transmissions that could be greetings, a few others that might represent basic concepts.  After a few hours of pointless fretting we all gathered in the bridge to broadcast our first message – standard stuff, prime numbers, periodic tables, images of human beings. The response was immediate. ‘They’re accelerating towards us,’ Grey shouted, pushing himself away from the table as if it had just electrocuted him, fingers twitching as he manipulated data. ‘Data shows the drive exhaust is hot steam, with radioactive particles mixed in. They’ll be here before we can even bring the drive up to full thrust.’ ‘Bump up the power levels on out transmissions, make damn sure they can hear us -‘ I started to say. ‘Oh, crap -’ snapped Grey. ‘I’m reading two, no, three fast-movers launching from the lead ship. Missiles, heading straight for us. Impact in twenty seconds.’ ‘Can we evade?’ I asked. Dreyfus shook his head. ‘We can’t even turn in the right direction in the time we have, but we have the main drive. It could work like a blowtorch at close range. We might be able to take a few of them with us.’ ‘What good would that do?’ I shouted back, gripping down hard on the arms of my chair. In those moments my thoughts turned to all the family and friends stored inside the memory cores, everyone who’d put their trust in me to deliver their sleeping minds to a new world. I would be the one who would have to kill them – if the aliens attempted to board I would have to release the antimatter containment, definitively erasing any knowledge of humanity the aliens might try and recover. The seconds ticked away and suddenly the missiles were passing us, brushing less than a kilometre from the hull. Then the alien ships danced ahead, evading at the last moment. The chatter between their spacecraft continued but still there was no response directed at us. The sigh around the conference table was audible as Dreyfus broke the silence. ‘I think I know what that was,’ he said slowly. ‘A threat display, like deer butting horns – a show of martial strength. I think they’re inviting us to respond.’ ‘They’ve got a lot to learn about diplomacy,’ I said on autopilot. ‘Maybe this is their version of diplomacy. They didn’t fire on us but they showed they could, and they proved they don’t care whether we fire back,’ Dreyfus replied. ‘From a certain point of view it almost makes sense.’ ‘So what do we do?’ I asked, but we all knew. We’d studied game theory and in the absence of any real information the optimal strategy was to mirror everything they did. ‘If we’re looking for a display of strength, we could always warm up the antimatter drive,’ said Grey. ‘I bet that would look impressive to a species that’s still stuck in the fission age.’ ‘And what if we’re wrong about what all of that meant?’ I said. ‘What if the aliens fire at us for real the next time?’ ‘The alternative is to sit here and listen to static,’ said Dreyfus. ‘Unless you expect them to suddenly start listening to our messages after the tenth day. I’m the contact expert, and I say light up the drive and see how they respond.’ ‘I swear, if we all die today the blame lies squarely with game theory,’ I said, grinning a little too widely. Twenty minutes later, we fed a trickle of anti-lithium into the two giant reaction chambers at the head of the ship, releasing a brilliant torrent of charged particles hotter than the fusing core of a nova. The beams billowed out for more than a thousand kilometres, spitting hard radiation that just missed the alien ships. Their reply was almost instantaneous, and the translator program soon settled on a reasonable interpretation. ‘Good to see you didn’t stab us. What we have is yours. Come and see.’ 3rd August They called themselves the Dyn. At least, that was how the translator phonetically transcribed their name for themselves. They had travelled far for some reason that didn’t seem to translate very well, they liked that we were strong and they were apparently giving themselves up to us, because we were obviously stronger. That much we understood. They didn’t understand why we’d bothered sending mathematical or scientific data to them because it was boring, and they were very confused when we asked them who built the wormholes. It seemed clear they’d never even thought of the question before. When we asked them which individual was speaking to us, we got a strangled rattle that the translator transcribed as K’txl. We asked what exact role she had and got more confusion. They also wanted, or were willing, to meet us in person. We argued back and forth about travelling to their ship, with the Starwhisp acting as mediator. Things had gone well since the near-disaster of first contact, but I couldn’t shake a feeling of uneasiness. Were the Dyn stupid or was the program just failing to translate them properly? Why had they expected us to ‘stab’ them and what did their gung-ho approach to diplomacy imply about their culture in general? In the end, Dreyfus and I boarded a tiny exopod and manoeuvred our way across the hundred-kilometre gulf towards the largest Dyn ship. ‘I wanted to try and start a cultural exchange,’ said Dreyfus, as the enormous flared tube loomed larger in the cockpit. ‘But the translator told me it couldn’t find equivalents for either word in their language. Literature, music, art – I sort of figured those would be universals, since they’re signs of intelligence, but apparently that’s not the case. I think it’s best if we avoid discussing abstractions; the translator doesn’t seem to handle them well.’ ‘Got it,’ I said, eyes still fixed on the Dynic spacecraft dead ahead. It was all unpainted metal with a few plastic extrusions; I spotted telescopes, antennae, radiators and what looked like automatic gun turrets as we approached. It seemed to be designed to be at least vaguely aerodynamic, as if the Dyn actually expected to land their enormous, radioactive spacecraft on a planetary surface. I blipped the ion rockets and halted the exopod just below the solid bulk of an airlock. The auto took over, nosing us gently upward as the solid metal hatch hissed open. The cockpit clanged as something knocked into the hull. Tiny bodies, all flailing limbs and bony plates and fur were sleeting past us. The flow ended after a few moments and their bloated corpses trailed away behind the exopod, slowly cooling to ambient temperature. But by then we were inside the Dyn ship and slowing to a halt. ‘What the hell was that?’ I asked Dreyfus, my voice tinny over the suit radio. ‘Rats, or the alien equivalent? You occasionally get problems with them on human ships and I suppose the Dyn don’t have any other way to deal with them.’ The air inside was strange, but not overwhelmingly so. More oxygen than a human could tolerate, along with a fog of strange hydrocarbons. We could probably breathe it without dying instantly but we weren’t inclined to try. Just before we pushed our way outside, Dreyfus put a hand out to stop me. ‘We should carry pistols with us,’ he said firmly. ‘What? That’s the worst possible thing we could do.’ ‘Remember they aren’t human; we don’t know how their emotions work so the normal rules don’t apply.’ ‘You’re going to say game theory again, aren’t you?’ I said wearily. ‘We don’t have any other option; we just have to mirror what they do. Their first contact with us was a threat display, and ever since we showed our superiority they’ve been friendly. The only thing we know for certain about them is that they respect strength so I suggest we keep up that display.’ I tried to object; it went against every diplomatic instinct I had, but Dreyfus’s words made undeniable sense. So we both loaded a dozen frag rounds into our magnetic pistols, strapped them to our belts and kicked out into the interior space of the ship. The first thing I noticed was the busyness of it all. Machines protruded from the dimly lit walls and floors, and everywhere the Dyn crowded. My first impression was of bears – they were huge and hunched over. But the heads were tapering and trilaterally symmetrical, muscular and insectile, with three narrow slits for eyes. Their skin was pale and wormlike but matted with shocking purple fur which seemed more like lichen. Animal eyes stared back at the two of us, but then the Dyn all turned away and went back to their tasks. We waved our arms, flashed suit lights and tried to draw on slates but the Dyn all ignored us. It was a pattern we saw repeated everywhere we wandered, apparently ignored. The Dyn gave us a glance and then continued robotically, not responding to any of the greetings we broadcast from our suit speakers. The ship itself was old technology, no different in fundamentals to something we could have built in the 20th century, had the space race turned out a little differently. We pulled our way through narrow fetid corridors lined with purple moss, trying to find the one who had communicated with us, K’txl. We emerged into a large chamber containing the most sophisticated equipment we’d yet seen on the Dyn ship. Electric lights dangled from the walls, illuminating figures hunched over consoles crammed with strange knobbed levers designed for the odd pincer-tentacles the Dyn used for hands. In the centre, K’txl floated; a little larger than the other Dyn, with a strange light in its eyes. Something about it indicated an intelligence we hadn’t seen in the other aliens, maybe the first sign of intelligence we’d yet seen on the ship. ‘Do you like what you’ve found?’ the translator said, over the hissing and clicking of the alien. We’d already agreed Dreyfus would take the lead in any conversation. ‘This is all very impressive,’ Dreyfus replied, choosing a general sentiment the translator had a good handle on. ‘I’m sure there is much we have to learn from each other.’ ‘What do you want to take?’ it replied. Dreyfus and I exchanged a confused glance. But at least it hadn’t attacked us yet. ‘We can share knowledge and technology in time,’ said Dreyfus, after a long pause. ‘For now, do we have permission to remain aboard?’ ‘What is… permission,’ the translator said. ‘Will you let us stay onboard for now?’ The reply was slow to arrive. ‘That’s a contradiction. You are strong. Why would you pretend to let us control you, that’s a lie.’ ‘We have no desire to hurt you, we don’t mean you any harm,’ said Dreyfus, but the translator bleeped at him, saying it couldn’t translate the last phrase. That didn’t seem like a good sign. ‘Why not?’ The Dyn said. ‘You didn’t stab us, so you must want us for something.’ Feeling increasingly uneasy, I switched to a private channel with Dreyfus. ‘Maybe we should just go along with whatever it’s saying,’ I said. ‘Ask it for their ship’s records or library and we can sort out the misunderstandings when we know more.’ 4th August The atmosphere on the bridge was tense, bordering on violent when Dreyfus and I gathered the next day. Grey was busy in the AI core, though I couldn’t imagine what could be more important than this meeting. Looking ahead, I saw Dreyfus had discarded most of the medical maintenance packages; he looked like a twenty year-old who’d lived his whole life in a sterile chamber. I supposed I didn’t look any better, but it was expected. Two decades of forced growth over two weeks meant missing out on the randomness of real ageing in a messy environment, but we could worry about the cosmetics of our new bodies if we survived the next week. K’txl had given us a reel of heavy magnetic tape which the ship had decoded into audio-visual recordings and in return Grey had decided to transmit a few scraps of our own files, suitably decompressed and translated. It wasn’t anything revealing or dangerous, a few bits of literature, the declaration of universal rights, scientific data they already knew. Their own files had turned out to be much more damning. We all stared in mute silence at a grainy black and white video. It looked like archive footage from Earth’s mid-20th century, but the Starwhisp teased out the details until it was clear. First there was an intricate map, all intersecting lines and circles which seemed to represent a whole network of wormholes the Dyn had explored. Countless worlds available in less time than it took to travel from Earth to Mars. The view zoomed in on an image taken from an aircraft of a planetary surface. Armies were charging at each other as huge artillery guns fired, fronts dozens of kilometres wide running with whatever the Dyn used for blood. Like the world wars of Earth’s dark past, but on a still larger scale; whole populations up in arms and running headlong to their deaths. The view changed, a seething mass of Dyn were crammed inside a high-walled circular pen the size of a city overseen by a guard tower. Dead bodies and dismembered limbs littered the ground. The view jumped to a similar pen, and another – it appeared to be a recurring theme in the records on K’txl’s ship. ‘Stop it,’ I said. ‘Just stop, I can’t watch anymore.’ The images disappeared, allowing me to look Dreyfus in the eye across the table. With our brains finally matured, the shaping process complete, we both had the clearness of thought we’d lacked in the immature bodies. I took a deep breath, forced myself to be analytical. ‘What are we looking at? And why the hell did it think massacres and… death camps were the first thing we wanted to see?’ ‘This is a record of K’txl’s domain. She wanted to show us how powerful she was,’ said Dreyfus, voice cracking. ‘It’s female?’ ‘The controlling Dyn are always female,’ Gray replied, eyes flickering as he looked through biological data. ‘Think of them like queen bees, though that really isn’t a good analogy. And those weren’t death camps, by the way. They were breeding pens the Dyn set up for their own offspring.’ ‘Why would anything do that, it doesn’t make sense,’ I said, trailing off. ‘I’ll get to that,’ Gray snapped. ‘But those gigantic total wars are what happens when the ritualised diplomacy breaks down, which is more or less every time the two Dyn factions are closely matched. The only outcome when Dyn meet is absolute surrender by one side or the other, or total war. I don’t think they understand what trade or compromise are.’ ‘That explains their behaviour on the ship,’ I said, wondering at the stability of my own voice. ‘And I suppose the ‘parasites’ we spotted being dumped into space weren’t actually parasites. They were other Dyn, weren’t they?’ Dreyfus nodded. ‘The way they treat their children is implied by their reproductive strategy. They spawn thousands of offspring and since they developed agriculture they’ve had far too many survive infanthood to support, hence the culling.’ ‘Are the children fully sentient?’ I asked, begging for it not to be true. ‘Oh yes. Their independence is chemically or psychologically suppressed, but they can still feel everything that’s happening. It must be a living hell for them.’ ‘And K’txl doesn’t see what’s wrong with that?’ I almost shouted. Dreyfus looked patiently back at me. ‘They don’t even have a concept of morality as we understand it. Stick K’txl in a human rights court and I’m willing to bet she’d never even realise what she was doing there. Frankly, I’m amazed the Dyn ever cooperated enough to develop language or build spacecraft, but it’s clear their technology hasn’t advanced in a very long time. They don’t record events well so it’s hard to tell exactly how long they’ve been in space, but their technology is always the same in every recording – in most respects, its pre-21st century. I’d guess they’ve been in space for thousands of years.’ I felt even sicker contemplating that gulf of time. The dull walls of the bridge chamber seemed to draw closer in as the thoughts ran through my mind. The sheer quantity of suffering. ‘Is there anything we can do about all of this?’ ‘With one ship armed with a canister of frozen zygotes?’ Dreyfus scoffed. ‘We’re in a vulnerable position right now and we need to protect ourselves. There’s nothing to be done about the Dyn, but they’ll leave us alone if we leave them alone – they understand that much about cooperation.’ ‘No,’ I said, feeling my thoughts harden. ‘If we don’t do anything, maybe no human being will ever come to this system again. No-one will ever know. Why don’t we send a message back to Earth and tell them what we’ve learnt?’ ‘What good would that do?’ Dreyfus shouted. ‘There’s no way for them to get here in less than a century.’ I sighed again and bent my head back. A headache was building behind my eyes, perhaps because I hadn’t been able to run a single stim program since waking. ‘Maybe not,’ said another voice. Grey pulled himself along the access tube and kicked into the centre of the chamber. He looked at least as weary as Dreyfus but there was a light in his eyes, like a trapped animal that has just seen a way out. ‘Where the hell have you been?’ I snapped. ‘Analysing that map the Dyn sent us of the wormhole connections, trying to find a pattern.’ ‘You’re bloody Nobel-hunting with the future of an intelligent species at stake -‘ ‘I’ve found a wormhole connection to Earth,’ Grey interrupted and just like that, all other noise in the room seemed to disappear, even the gentle throbbing of the air circulation. ‘The map was hard to interpret, but it’s quite clear there is a wormhole somewhere in this star system, leading to somewhere in Earth’s solar system. I know you’re going to ask, and yes, I have double-checked everything. I’m certain that’s what the map means. I don’t know where, but it is somewhere within a billion kilometres.’ ‘It’s a shame we couldn’t find the other end, we could have saved ourselves a long flight,’ I grinned weakly. ‘But if what you say is true, then we’ve found a way to make a difference’ ‘If we send a signal to Earth the old-fashioned way, they can decide whether to fly here and do… something. Maybe they’ll find some clever way to improve the Dyn -‘ ‘Now hold on,’ said Dreyfus. ‘You can’t impose human standards on another species-‘ ‘Shut up,’ I snapped, the flash of anger so sudden and violent that my arm twitched like I was going to throw a punch. ‘Do you think any Dyn wants to be enslaved or murdered? If there’s a way to fix all of that, then we do it. It’s not like they’d be difficult to conquer.’ ‘No,’ Grey smiled, nodding at me. ‘We’re so far beyond them technologically that any war would be a joke. An interplanetary attack ship could destroy a thousand of those nuclear-powered rockets without breaking a sweat. I vote for sending a laser to Earth and letting them decide what to do.’ ‘They didn’t attack us,’ said Dreyfus weakly. ‘Even when they found out we could destroy them all, they didn’t fire on us. Are we really going to break that trust?’ Dreyfus didn’t look happy about it, but this wasn’t a democracy. ‘Grey, prepare to transmit all our logs and the Dyn records by interstellar laser to the Sol system. Then I want a full burn out of here. We’ll do our best to continue the original mission, but I can’t put the safety of the ship over the fate of an entire species.’ Everyone nodded grimly, understanding what I meant. The message might spell our doom if the Dyn realised the eventual consequences of what we’d done, but we had to do something. We all knew the risks. 6th August The first Dyn ship slid out of the wormhole almost as soon as we’d finished broadcasting the message to Earth. They came through nose-to-tail, at a rate of one every four seconds, as if there was a loading mechanism on the other side spitting the vessels out like bullets. The alarm blared and I realised I’d fallen asleep in the bridge, surrounded by interpretations of the Dyn archive. ‘Dyn ships are accelerating towards us,’ said the inert voice of the Starwhisp. ‘We have been under thrust for thirty minutes, but they will still catch us before they exhaust their fuel reserves.’ ‘How many ships?’ ‘More than three hundred so far, but there’s no sign of them slowing. They started as soon as we began broadcasting at Earth.’ I prodded Dreyfus and Grey, who had similarly passed out from exhaustion. We’d guessed this might happen, after all. Now humans and Dyn were cognisant of each other, and we had already played our part. ‘We’re being hailed by the lead Dyn ship,’ said Starwhisp. ‘Put it through to me,’ I said, before I lost my nerve. The translated voice of K’txl filled my ears. ‘Deepest regrets, but now we understand humanity too well.’ ‘What do you mean?’ I said, as innocently as possible, but Drefyus flashed me a murderous look. We were both thinking of the cultural data we’d sent the Dyn. A horrible sinking feeling filled me as I tried to work out what the alien would make of human values. ‘You imagine that we are your enemy, though we surrendered. We heard the words you sent us, and we know you will hate us. Morality, law, all these strange imaginings. You live in a made-up world, where strong and virulent ideas rule your minds, and those ideas tell you to kill us for how we act. We are scared of your great powers and your peculiar madness, and we have to stop you. Stop moving and let us talk to you.’ ‘I can’t do that,’ I said. ‘This is out of our hands now.’ ‘You think those from your home are coming to save you?’ It was impossible, but I imagined mocking laughter behind the inert voice of the translator. ‘We are coming to stop your Sol as well, and we’ll get there before your warning can. Your warning moves at the speed of light, but wormholes go faster.’ ‘Don’t try,’ I said, wondering why I was bothering. ‘You’ve seen what we’re capable of and if you attacked Earth you’d be utterly defeated.’ ‘How tough do you think you are?’ said the alien voice. ‘We will send as many as we need, right to your capitals. We would have been nice, if you had not been insane. Why does it matter so much what we do in our own worlds? The rules in your head will tell you to kill and smash our domains, we cannot let that happen. Give us your ship and make things easier. We’re stronger than you think. Observe.’ ‘We’re receiving a live video from a site on the other side of the wormhole, shall I analyse and project the results?’ Starwhisp interrupted, cutting off K’txl. I nodded curtly. The colour-enhanced picture looked like a rubble field in deep space, but it wasn’t. The scale panned and zoomed out, showing the cloud to be larger and larger. Then new lights began to twinkle; the blue exhausts of nuclear engines, and what should have been obvious from the very beginning dawned on me. The Dyn had been in space for a long time, as Dreyfus had said. They had made it so far with such primitive ships, barely improving their technology with each generation, but building larger and larger fleets with further incremental improvements. Just how extensive was their military? Now we knew, as the starwhisp tallied up the brilliant sparks of starwhisp exhausts. The Dyn had a fleet of millions of spacecraft, so many that our technological advantage wouldn’t mean anything, especially if they used the advantage of surprise and were determined enough to absorb horrendous losses. The Dyn would emerge from this wormhole, fly directly to the Sol wormhole and maybe destroy human civilisation. Dreyfus and Grey understood everything in the same moment, and then Dreyfus almost exploded at me. ‘You idiot! You never even thought that maybe the Dyn would have a plan to deal with us, did you? Look what you’ve done! You self-righteous bastard, trying to play god -‘ Grey had to restrain Dreyfus as he lunged forward, but I felt nothing but a black, creeping dread as I realised what we’d unleashed. K’txl’s voice appeared on audio again, the Starwhisp piping it through automatically. ‘We’re never going to stop, now we know what the humans will do when they find out about us, when they hear the message you sent to them, when we know they will come for us soon. Give up and help us understand you. Surrender as we surrendered, when we thought you were strong enough to kill us all. Otherwise we will destroy you.’ I removed my hands from my face, feeling the tears that had started to flow. I knew what we had to do, a forced move that offered no alternatives. There was only one thing left to deny them, pathetic as it might seem, and the decision wasn’t any different for agonising over it. The Dyn were gaining on us, and it was a mathematical certainty that they would close the gap and disable our ship. I had to issue the order while we still had the chance, and prevent them from stealing our technology. It would give the Earth a fighting chance. I looked up again at Dreyfus and Grey, and saw the anger fade from Dreyfus’s face. My failures didn’t matter now there was nothing left to hope for. ‘Starwhisp,’ I said, voice cracking. ‘Begin auto-destruct sequence. Let’s give it fifteen minutes, that’s a nice round number.’ We sat in silence as the awful countdown progressed, watching the Dyn creep up on us and wishing desperately that we’d made any other choice for any other reason. Dreyfus looked a few times like he was about to say something, but didn’t. The end came in an instant as all the stored antimatter detonated at once. The Dyn spacecraft continued through the expanding debris field, onward to the wormhole and Earth.