# com The Other Moon

The Other Moon 41 - 52 minutes

 

 
 
 

 Previously There is star-filled space, a dim and distant orange-red sun and, off to one side, the umber cloud-tops of a gas giant. There is a flash of brilliant actinic light, and it appears like a conjuring trick, like the universe itself has glitched – the Other Moon, huge as a mountain. To all appearances, it is an asteroid – almond-shaped, grey-brown and pitted by craters, tall as a city. It sits motionless, ten thousand kilometres above the clouds, in grand defiance of orbital mechanics. Clinging to its fore end, in the midst of a flat expanse clear of boulders and canyons, is a curious stone orrery, a miniature representation of this stellar system shaped out of asteroidal rock. It was built when the universe was young, made to be understood. It is the control interface – moving a marker across the orrery will move the Other Moon, as if by sympathetic magic. In its midst of this orrery sits a hunched, suited, four-limbed figure, bony jaw-plates and keenly intelligent eyes searching, always searching, for something new to comprehend and master. She is an explorer, the most cunning and curious of all Dyn – and, as she would tell it, the wisest. She calls herself Seeker, and though she has already discovered much, her journey is far from over. Seeker relaxed, relieved to have escaped the threatening environment around Firsthome. Below her, the churning clouds of the giant world her people knew as ‘The Eye’ filled half the sky. She looked down at the orrery, at the gem she’d placed next to the rounded pebble that represented The Eye. That was it – the last planet to be visited. She was the first to see many of these places from orbit – there was Firsthome, her home, the inner rocky worlds and now The Eye. There were no more anomalies – absolutely nothing to indicate the former presence of the Others. She needed to look further. Seeker glanced down at the grand orrery – it was a perfect model of her home system, the First system, but that was all. Of course, there were no representations of anything beyond the First system – but there was no fundamental reason for that limit. She just needed to give it the correct instruction. And then, the stars. “Tell me how you work,” she said, in her own language. No response. “Tell me why you are here.” No response. “Tell me who made you.” Seeker sat before the orrery for long hours. She had time – even if some foolhardy Dyn pursued her by conventional means, they wouldn’t arrive for months. Those who built this place had almost nothing in common with her except, apparently, a desire to help and to be understood. The orrery was evidence of that. If the Others could interpret the orrery, perhaps they could understand a code of hers. Seeker drew a grabber from the belt around her midsection, and began scratching in the ground. She had long since memorised charts of local space (local – when even the nearest star could never be reached in a hundred lifetimes of flight in the fastest ship ever built!), the only remaining question was one of projection. Extend a plane out of the First system’s ecliptic, scale distances correctly – one to one hundred quadrillion. Find and grind pebbles to a rough scale approximation. Scale their size by planetary mass – not radius. The pebbles in the first orrery weren’t scaled by radius. Make marks with the grabber to measure intervals. They don’t have to be exact – construct a new map in the place of the old one, but on a higher scale. Show interstellar distances. Make it understand where she needed to be. It was done within an hour. The orrery shifted beneath Seeker, the pebbles moving slightly as the Other Moon made corrections. It understood. This was not the end of the mystery. It was the beginning. Seeker raised the gem, and placed it next to the nearest pebble. The universe folded around her. The Eye and the First Sun disappeared. Dyn knew the meaning of their lives. It was to play their part in the Line – immortal, omnipresent, all-consuming. The connection of parent to child, the unbroken chain of inheritance, provided a greater purpose than any single mind or body could contrive. The individual was a cell, the Line was the whole, the end-in-itself. Seeker knew her Line would endure. She knew her destiny was the universe. She had everything a Dyn could desire. Why was she not satisfied? The restlessness had begun when she first gained independence, breaking free of the warren of tunnels on the border of Night and fleeing into that cold unknown to found a new Line and domain. The search had intensified when she had reached out into the greater night that lay beyond Firsthome, leading her species into space behind her, discovering the false asteroid and uncovering its secret. She would never stop reaching for new boundaries to breach. The search was never-ending – the ending was the search. The speed of the engine Seeker stood on had turned the stars into a distorted swirl of light. The sky was black, aside from a single splash of blue light to the fore, in the direction of travel. Her asteroid moved so fast that even photons of light were twisted in their paths. The effect reminded her of rain droplets striking her jaw-plates when she used to gallop through the forests of Firsthome; whichever way she turned they always seemed to be coming at her. Her ship had been dismantled over the first weeks and months of her journey and reassembled into a makeshift shelter on the surface of her new home. This was not a true asteroid. It was a facade, a shell of accumulated rock and iron around something utterly incomprehensible, older than her species. She could expand out over its surface from here, melting and casting the asteroidal rock into domes. It would be difficult. The Other Moon had already taken her hundreds of times further than any other explorer had come. Already she was moving thousands of times faster. Lightspeed – other Dyn thought it was something special about light, something like the sound barrier which her rockets and cannons had once broken and then left far behind. But this is incorrect. Time and distance are related at the most basic level of the Universe, both reflections of something higher. Talk of exceeding it is sheer semantic nonsense. You cannot count all the way to infinity and then go past that. But these limitations would not stop her. Practicalities absorbed the first months of Seeker’s residence aboard the Other Moon. Her ship carried bioreactors, a viable core of subservient Dyn, and a fully functional machine-shop. She lived, and learned to sustain life. Her Other Moon left the First System and continued on its way, following the path she ordained the day she had discovered this place. The pale blue glow of aberrated starlight was barely enough to illuminate Seeker’s habitat, assembled around the summit of the Other Moon, surrounding the grand orrery like a temple complex around its altar. An observer flying above the Other Moon might just make out the regular silhouettes of artificial constructs, if the flickering light of frameshift travel happened to glance across the surface just right. They might distinguish the boxy reassembled ship shelter from its surrounding cluster of domes; hydroponics, machine-shop, astronomical instruments aimed directly ahead, and a barracks/breeding-pen, all scavenged from the ship or manufactured from the silicon and iron of the Other Moon’s surface. Off to one side, the tall towers of heat-radiators stood above a fission reactor, and all around were the tiny mobile shadows of suited upper-children roaming about the craggy surface; gathering raw materials, taking measurements and surveying. Seeker’s domain barely changed from month to month or even year to year, having settled into a steady equilibrium on its long interstellar voyage. In a chamber which had once been the flight deck of Seeker’s exploration vessel, she sat, hunched over in concentration. The topic of Seeker’s thoughts never wavered – the Others, their motives and their apparent absence from the universe. It was a simple enough sequence of thoughts. The Other Moon was left by a benevolent mind, those Others who had wished to grant her species a means to travel the stars. This was no mere trinket or triviality – it was a thousand-trillion ton asteroid which could blink out of existence in one place and then flare up in another like a forest fire, appearing as fast as light permitted. It was meant to be used for something great. It was a gift. “But why?” Seeker wondered to herself. She’d spent a few hours inspecting her new, somewhat bare domain, barely noticing the achievement of constructing this with such limited resources. She was thinking of the Others, and their orrery. Why not simply send a message? If their power was so incredible, why not simply appear in person to make their demands or declare their intentions? That was what she would do. That was what any Dyn would do. Instead, they had left a dumb tool and an implicit message – use this as you see fit. She could form no coherent picture of their motives. If her questions had answers, they would be found out among the stars. Seeker would reach them, one by one. It might take many more lifetimes, but that didn’t matter. The individual was only a cell. She would find whatever had sent the Other Moon, completing the mission inherent in its existence. Seeker returned to her quarters and again lost long hours to silent contemplation. Her mind moved faster now even than in those heady days when she had first contemplated spaceflight. New ideas came uncontrollably, some utterly mundane and others wild and far removed from reality. She could extract and enrich uranium from the regolith, and keep her domain powered indefinitely. One day she might reverse-engineer the power of the Other Moon, and blip between continents and worlds like stepping over stones in a stream. It was so frustrating, knowing that even if her Line persisted for a thousand centuries there would never be enough time, that there would always be lives she would never lead. Dyn had little need for personal comfort – when Seeker retired, it was to a blown-rock dome just large enough to pace around in, floored and walled by the ubiquitous, and almost symbiotic, frond-moss. When the nightmares began she was not prepared. Dyn rarely sleep – their brains rest in stages, ensuring a minimal level of consciousness at all times, valuable on a world with no day-night cycle. But they still have the capacity, rarely invoked, to fully escape consciousness. Seeker used it as infrequently as possible. Seeker never could adequately describe the content of her dreams, would never summon words or images that fit what she had seen. One word, only – shadows. Like those cast by the ancient hunter-kites which used to prey on careless young Dyn, like something vast and terrible had turned slowly to look at her. She assumed that ancient fears of vulnerability had risen up. Dyn aren’t meant to be cut adrift from their kind as she was. Seeker put the shadows out of her mind during the long weeks between rests, though as she felt the weariness build day by day, she still faced sleep with apprehension. Perhaps this was final proof of just how far she had drifted from true Dyn – that her mind was throwing up such fantasies in its quieter moments. All the while, the first of her target stars drew closer – first trillions, then billions, then mere hundreds of millions of kilometres ahead. She would search for artefacts like the Other Moon or other evidence of lost civilization and then move on. The Other Moon appeared high above the second system’s ecliptic. Her telescopes found new worlds, none life bearing, and imaged asteroids by the thousands. None of these showed anomalous motion. She blipped between the planets next, following short jumps of a few minutes each. She saw wonders; towering mountains of ice, churning cloud tops in colours her brain had never catalogued before, rivers of molten metal on planets blasted by solar radiation. She sent disposable lower-children to the surface of some worlds, in one-use gliders or landers, chemical-propelled and with the barest minimum of guidance. The images they sent back only increased her appetite for discovery. After what felt like a million centuries of exploration, the second system had been surveyed completely. There was nothing. No sign of the Others having ever existed – which was insane. Not that they were gone – Seeker knew species rose and fell, that extinction was always a possibility. Rather, that they had left behind nothing – no mined-out asteroids, no structures, no monuments or lasting legacy – as if they had carefully tidied up after themselves, or had been made to never be – impossible. Seeker knew that if she had a fraction of their power she would have remade the universe – whole worlds mined and converted to habitats, Dyson swarms, clouds of interstellar ships so dense they blotted out the starlight. If she had such fantasies, surely some among the Others had as well. Even if they were gone, where was their legacy? The question tore at Seeker as she prepared for the next journey. Volatiles, water and organics were not plentiful on her journey between the stars. She had developed finer control over the Other Moon’s frameshift capabilities, determining that they could also be used to exert small reactionless impulses. A more comprehensive interface was painstakingly built-up, and Seeker deployed arrays of robot manipulators that delivered complex patterns of vibration to the Orrery interface. With fine control achieved, Seeker carefully nudged her world near to comets and small ice moons. Rotation and attitude control was impossible, which made approach very challenging. However, she had the time to get it right. She set course for the third system. This journey would be longer than the last. Decades followed. The complex around the orrery grew until it resembled a small but functional domain on the homeworld. With increased scope came increased population, as always. Population always grew to reach capacity, and so came the perennial problem of control. Pheromones would slot a mature child into the Line or domain, obliterating any unnecessary individuality, but the young always had to be managed by cruder means. She was not trying to found a new Line, but she needed labour – she had to delegate. The nightmares, the shadows, seemed to grow worse the longer she spent in the strange, half-real isolation of frameshift. Perhaps that was to be expected – isolated not just from the rest of her kind, but also the rest of the universe, she had little else to do but think. The realisation she came to on the second journey was entirely unanticipated. Seeker had taken to conversing with the lower-children, those young enough that they had not fallen entirely under her control. Of the hundreds corralled into the barracks, not one in ten would survive to adulthood. They cowered from her at first, but when she ordered them to stand and speak to her they obeyed – out of fear, not loyalty or love. Seeker remembered… being very much like them. She recalled the ancestral thoughts of that original Seeker who had fled from her own collapsing domain. These young contained a piece of her mind, each one had that potential. But every time she returned to the barracks she addressed different Dyn: too many of the former individuals were culled in the interim by the obedient upper-children, or lost to starvation. ‘Too many?’ what a bizarre thought. Where had it come from? Seeker wondered if, so far from her origin, she had begun to return to an emotional childhood, to her youth on Firsthome beneath the cold Night, when nothing seemed more important than her own bodies’ survival, when the Line was a distant abstraction. Ridiculous. And yet – so many children were wasted in the churn. She had never tried to imagine a better alternative. Her thoughts had been held back by a self-assured ignorance, a bald assertion that no improvement was possible or even desirable, that the Line required a constant churn of deaths, that population must expand to reach capacity. No: the death of the individual means the vigour of the Line – even now, a part of Seeker’s mind was certain that the Line needed no justification, that the Line was the end-in-itself. She had to try anyway – why was it necessary for the children to die? It was a question she’d never imagined asking and even her failure to ask it had never been noticed until this moment – her thoughts curving around that blind spot without the slightest hint of dissonance. Now was the time to ask. The children died because their numbers grew too large, because the alternative was a population crash, or sterile stagnation. Fear of mortality kept the young alive, ensured the strongest prospered, served as a stop against atrophy and the inspiration behind all great achievements. If the Lines on Firsthome had not struggled and fought one another for millennia, they would never have given rise to her. She, Seeker, would have never been emboldened and driven to fly beyond the air without war and death at her back. Besides, the disconnected individual was not truly alive – that was why no other animal on Firsthome had ever risen to intelligence. Without the churn, lone Dyn would never raise up the very strongest and most worthy child from their Domain, their Line would atrophy and a Dyn’s essence would die with their body. The Line was where value was invested. But why did it have to be that way, why not simply prolong individual lives or use cloning or any of a dozen other solutions? Whatever benefit gained from choosing amongst competing children could be attained directly by simple genetic selection. Seeker realised that she already had the knowledge to preserve her Line’s vigour without such a churn, without a vast domain supported on the bodies of thousands of children, living and dying beneath her. But this change would be impossible, cancerous. What would her Line look like with no Domain? With no unifying impulse, organization would surely collapse. Why was this so difficult to think about? The third system came and went. More decades passed, Seeker saw more wonders. She looked up and found that she struggled to pick the First Sun out of the background stars. There was no sign of the Others in the fourth system, but another resolution hardened within Seeker. She had told herself that the individual was nothing, lost in the depths of the Line, but that did not quite fit with some other beliefs which she held. What did she know? She had to perceive clearly, unite a divided mind as the Line united individual minds. Seeker cared for her own life, for her own experience. Her desire to know the universe served her Line, but the experience was enjoyed by her, this Seeker, not by the Line. The implication was clear. No, said the voice of tradition: the vitality of the Line was the death of the individual. What she thought was mad, child-sentimentality. Imagine if every cell within her body refused to stop dividing, citing its own life as more important than the whole. It was more than wrong, it was obviously absurd to imagine every single individual exploding out of the Line until the Domain became a cancerous mass that bred like bacteria consuming everything – and if she simply ceased to raise new children her Line would stagnate and die out, and she would lose everything. Even so, Seeker could not deny what she had come to understand. She couldn’t let her moral sense, which screamed at the outrage, get in the way of doing what she knew was right. She knew for a fact, from the inside, despite all instinct and tradition, that her own life mattered apart from the Line. The next question was why not the others – why not the children? It seemed undeniable – they all mattered, every Dyn. That settled it; she would have to find a solution, and no matter that the problem presented an impossible dilemma. She could imagine the impossible. She began limiting the growth of her domain – fewer children meaning fewer deaths, and pondered ways to make their lives more tolerable in the time they had before their minds broke and were absorbed into the Line. It was a project worthy of her attention, one that would likely take centuries – and one that would surely drive her apart from the rest of her species. All the while, the Other Moon raced towards the fifth system. The arrival came, a procedure that was almost routine by now. The system was nearly devoid of planets – two inner rocky worlds circling a brilliant white main-sequence star. There would be discovery here – Seeker had come to understand that even lifeless, airless rocks had a beauty and wonder to them – but nothing more. Seeker spotted the anomaly on the second day of surveillance. It was an echo of that long-ago day when she had first noticed the Other Moon. But this was not another Other Moon. For one thing, it was still. It didn’t even move in a conventional orbit, but was static relative to the star’s reference frame. For another, it bent light like a black hole. Seeker raced to it along a ten-minute path through a bubble of frameshift distortion, arriving one hundred kilometres from whatever-it-was. What she saw was beyond any words she knew. It was a structure, a roughly spherical swirl of enmeshed layers interpenetrating, flickering blue like the sparks from an engine igniter. It was surrounded by a dodecahedral cage, a Platonic solid which Seeker knew to be perfect and timeless: mathematics made material. And within the dodecahedron and the swirl of energy was distorted starlight, an alien sun. Another world. Seeker understood. It was so obvious. The Other Moon was nothing more than a cart. Just as a Dyn might ride a motor carriage before boarding an intercontinental train, so the Other Moon was meant to navigate between these places, like a blood cell flowing through capillaries, driven through a larger system. The interstice – the name came to her at once – filled half the sky from her close vantage, yet she felt no tug of gravity, no hint of the incredible energies which that dodecahedral cage must be channelling. Seeker spent hours examining the structure’s emissions on her own instruments. It periodically threw out waves of high-energy particles, and she suspected there were other emanations her instruments weren’t able to pick up. No immediate hints arose as to its nature or mechanism. Nothing woke up to speak to her. Were the Others mute, or incapable of communication? Were these machines their true minds, and if so why were they content to be so passive? No, whoever they were, whoever they had been, this was not the sum of it. That irresistible desire to explore was still there, still burning as bright as it ever had, still not entirely rational. Seeker had begun to see her own existence as expendable for the sake of greater knowledge. Her purpose, now she understood, was not simply the preservation of her Line. Because, in the end, the Line was just a means to preserve experience. Dyn had no word for heresy, but that thought sparked a sense of rebellion in her. She gave the command to move forward, into the interstice. Nothing happened. The Other Moon, apparently, knew what it was being driven towards and had decided ‘No’ – like a skittish draft animal. That was a problem. If she had a reaction engine as large as a city, perhaps she could propel the Moon through the gate under thrust, but such a project was beyond her. Days passed, as small chemical-propelled excursion modules flitted between the Other Moon and the interstice, examining the support structure around it. The cage itself repelled all attempts at approach, pushing projectiles and probes away with forces that grew more rapidly than the Inverse square law allows, repulsive gravitation. That was the key to this place. She imagined it like this: if the interstice was a mineshaft dug into the rock of the Dayside of long-ago firsthome, this cage was the tunnel prop that held it open. But what was it truly, without metaphors? Seeker could not touch it, so she didn’t know, but to generate appreciable gravity of any kind it had to be extraordinarily dense. Seeker knew what had to happen next. With only a vague sense that she ought to be fearful, she boarded a larger and better equipped excursion module, armoured against radiation and tidal forces and jetted away from the dome-ridden, pitted surface of the Other Moon, towards the interstice. She looked up and noted the dim red local star, the faint mark that was the First Star, the amorphous cloud of stars that was the wider galaxy. From the forward porthole Seeker saw the dodecahedral cage expand, the untouchable blue-white gridwork racing towards her, beckoning her onwards. She’d calculated a trajectory through the centre of one face of the dodecahedron, figuring that should minimise any disruption she might experience, but Seeker already felt an appreciable tidal force, growing stronger as she drew closer, gravitational forces building faster than should be possible. The starlight around the interstice grew more distorted, beginning to drain away from the porthole until she saw only the cage and the sphere of stars within. She keyed into the Other Moon’s radio, and listened as the intervals between its clock updates grew longer, time and space stretching around her. Ahead, the false sphere of stars within the interstice expanded, growing into her surroundings, like the image in a photograph flipping into reality and replacing the world around her. Seeker was within the dodecahedral cage now, the radio signals disappeared, and within the cramped cabin she was pulled by strange forces. Dyn did not rely on sensitive internal tissues for balance, so Seeker felt no vertigo or disorientation. She merely observed the tugging and shifting forces that were applied to her limbs, as if she were diving deep beneath the ocean, feeling water press in around her. Shapes swirled around Seeker, the vibrations growing until her eyesight faded. There was nothing but heavily distorted starlight visible through the porthole, as if she were seeing space from the outside. Then the world came rushing in from every direction, and she was moving away from the structure. A distorted bubble of the original space, Other Moon included, receded to aft, held within its own dodecahedral cage. She was on the other side, and unfamiliar yellow-white sunlight spilled in through the porthole. All motion ceased and Seeker at last found herself adrift and weightless. She turned and saw the cage, the other end of the interstice and the faint, heavily distorted smudge that was the Other Moon, keeping station for now. She looked up at a band of stars, faintly visible through the scarred porthole. Not the uniform haze of stars that every Dyn, even Seeker herself in her last decades of voyaging to the nearby systems, would recognise as the wider galaxy, but a near-solid arc of translucent light. She was within a spiral galaxy, like those imaged by Firsthome’s most powerful telescopes. Another galaxy… Seeker recoiled from the window as if it had delivered an electrical shock. She recalled her earliest memories, when life had extended no further than the tiny, constrained patch of fields and mudbrick domes of her mother’s domain, when a wall of hills had seemed as impassable as the gulf between planets and other domains over the horizon might as well have been island universes, when the stars themselves evoked not even awe, because such distances meant nothing, flat and uninteresting. And yet – the distances to the stars she had once looked up at, they were nothing compared to the distance that separated her from the site where that original domain had once rested. It was almost impossible to imagine that they occupied the same reality. Seeker peered at the porthole as her ship slowly rotated. The sun and interstice left her field of view, and unfamiliar constellations became visible. Could she see her galaxy from here? Her home galaxy – even the words sounded absurd in her own mind. She imagined floating just above her original home, remembering precisely the low yurt where she and a hundred other immature Dyn had once been crammed, then zooming out, clicking up and up through factors of a thousand, a million, a billion, and still further to the unknown, universe-spanning distance across which the interstice had delivered her. And yet, it was all still true, that dome and this interstice were part of one of the same reality, a unity. She could imagine the impossible. She still had a task to complete – discover the secrets of the Others. Seeker tentatively tried the controls of the excursion pod, managing to reflect a radar ping off the Interstice’s boundary cage. She was falling away from it, with only a small reserve of fuel – enough to complete a return burn and a hard landing on the Other Moon. There had to be something worth seeing here – but without the instruments of the Other Moon she was back to basics. That was acceptable. It was most of a day before her scan of the sky discovered something new. There was a planet nearby – a green-grey surface and absorption lines for oxygen in its atmosphere. No doubt it was life-bearing. That was curious – the first life ever discovered outside the First System, and right on the other side of the interstice. She looked closer with scopes and cameras – there was a single large moon, but no surface lights, no radio emissions or heat sources. And above, in a close orbit – another distortion, blurring the starlight behind it. It was another interstice, perhaps a hundred thousand kilometres distant, shadowing the planet. The link in the network. The tableaux unfolded for her then – the life bearing planet, the interstice, the incredible distance. It made sense, and the purpose, the meaning behind it all exploded before Seeker like water bursting through a vast dam. She understood why, if not how or when. The purpose of all this was to connect life to life. How rare was life or intelligence? Too rare to ever meet, and so the Others had decided that something had to be done about this. They’d used their godlike powers to join the universe up, compressing distance to nothing, to allow for an eventual meeting of minds. If – and this was a big ‘if’ – the whole chain of supposition was correct, then there must be another intelligence somewhere out there, one at a level of development like hers, which had not yet discovered the network. But the Other Moon refused to play its part. For unguessable alien reasons, it had failed to pass through the interstice. Curious. Seeker’s exploration had reached an impassable barrier. No craft she could build with such meagre resources stood a hope of making a return trip into the network. With her current resources, she could perhaps construct a conventional method to force the Other Moon through the gate, building the machines to mine the material to build great gas-guns or fission rockets powerful enough to propel such a vast mass over the threshold. She had achieved more with less so many times before. There was another way. She could return to her home domain, construct a propulsion unit for the Other Moon there, recruit more explorers and begin the next stage of unravelling the mystery. It would impose a delay, but it would be safer. Seeker remained on the other side of the interstice for as long as her life-support allowed. She took images and spectral readings of the surrounding space, though she could find no reference points even by attempting to pattern-match the most distant detectable galaxies. She made a return trip and flung smaller, radio-controlled probes towards the green world; the images they sent back confirming a life bearing world but nothing more. Seeker yearned to walk upon its surface, but no matter how she ran the numbers it was impossible. Perhaps she could make it there one-way, if she cannibalised all her short-range shuttles and worked for months to manufacture a glider. She could found a new domain on a new world, try to adapt to local life, as another Seeker once had long ago. Seeker recalled those centuries of slow expansion, struggling to found No – something told her that this time she had reached the limit. It was time to go home. Seeker took one last look at the planet through her scopes, then pulsed the reaction control thrusters, aiming her shuttle back through the interstice. The alien sunlight disappeared from the porthole, and she applied thrust to the main chemical engines. The interstice expanded, engulfing her surroundings, and the alien galaxy vanished. Seeker emerged a handful of light years from the First System, on the other side of the Interstice – absurd that she now thought of this as ‘close to home’. The preparations for a direct return were completed swiftly. She’d discovered a partial solution to preservation of domains without the infliction of unnecessary suffering – still a thought that felt foreign, childlike and sentimental, unbecoming of a great explorer.  A simple alteration to the control pheromones, worked up in her chemical laboratory, was able to prevent the subsumption of independence when the children reached maturity. That prevented them from reaching reproductive maturity, which prevented her domain from growing – undesirable in the long term, but an effective way to halt the churn of lives. She tried to imagine where this would end up – would there be a hundred small Lines, all cooperating as equals? Even she feared what such a future might bring. Seeker laid in a course for the First System, and the universe imploded around her as the mysterious mechanism of the frameshift drive propelled her across the skein of the universe. In that final journey, Seeker never did unravel the mystery of the network. The worlds without, the whole network, awaited her, but she was content to hold off on the final step of that mystery. It was the stories she’d told and the realization of the fundamentality of experience to all Dyn, whether Autarch or lowly child, that enthralled her on her return journey, the world she held within where Dynic suffering ended, which called to be made real. That, along with the worlds that were, the story she had created for herself, which would stand forever to be told and passed down her Line when this ageing Seeker died. What a history – and not even a fraction complete! The nightmares – the shadows – returned, worse than ever. She saw – hallucinated – them out among the stars, so intensely that they almost bled into waking life. She ignored them. Seeker’s domain expanded, growing in sophistication over the journey. She began to wonder whether the peace she left the First System in had lasted, or whether the churn of population pressure had returned once again. The First System drew closer as the frameshift drive brought her in towards Home, aiming to inject her into a precise equatorial orbit. What had become of her Line in the vast stretch of time since she’d departed? There were many questions about to be answered. Seeker sat in the dome she commanded her worldlet from, before a bank of controls which operated the command interface above the Orrery – delivering physical taps and jolts of electrical current, a painstakingly negotiated code that the machine would interpret. The swirl of blue light was visible through her sky dome, placed at the tip of the Moon like the sentinel at the fore of a ship, arrowing towards Home. The sky flickered and light spilled away from that single point, and a crater-scarred, ash-choked brown world appeared before her. Wrong. The thought was immediate and absolute. There was a vibration beneath her, an impact. An alarm shrieked. Seeker looked down at the radar display – it was choked with fast-movers, too many to count. She looked up, forcing her gaze away from the horrifying dead world, her world, and towards the firefly lights of hundreds of spacecraft – no, thousands. No – far more; they didn’t know she would appear here. Local space must be supersaturated with them. They’d spent a long time working on this trap. React. Fight back. With what? Assess the situation. Seeker pulled up the radio microphone, ready to deliver orders to her excursion craft. As soon as she flipped it on there was an unfamiliar voice – it had been so long since she’d spoken to an equal. “I speak on behalf of all domains. We cannot allow a rogue unchallengeable power to exist above all Dyn. Grant us the use of your vessel and you will be honoured.” No, no – this was wrong. This could not be happening, there was too much left to do. She would not give into them, she would not give them access to all the worlds beyond. What would Dyn do with the Other Moon? Perpetuate themselves, fly across the universe but never change, never evolve, stuck in an inescapable pit of suffering. “You are the last of your Line, but we do not wish to extinguish you. We will respect your value if you cooperate.” Liar. Seeker silenced the voice and ordered her excursion craft to launch. They did so, puffs of chemical vapour expanding away as they cleared the Other Moon, racing to meet the incoming foes. She was able to focus on them with her scopes – the ships were unfamiliar, more streamlined, with hotter blue exhausts, an evolved version of her own gaseous-core nuclear engine. She watched one attacker balloon apart, surrounded by a halo of smaller, yellow exhaust flames; gunfire launching explosive missiles. An excursion craft arrowed into the ship, tearing through plating and hull and scattering both into a shower of fast-moving debris. The Other Moon shuddered again – she was receiving fire. The enemy ships were diving towards her at enormous closing velocities – ten, twenty, thirty gees. They were desperate to get here as fast as possible, before- time to leave. Seeker sent the command and the attackers vanished. Four ships had made it within the boundary, and a fifth was just making the crossing – it was shredded apart instantaneously. There was an astounding flash that whited out the skydome and blew apart half of her instruments. Seeker recoiled from the console, and when her vision cleared she saw the familiar swirl of frameshift travel but within that bubble three surviving attackers braking hard, inscribing long exhaust beams across the void. Too slow. An excursion craft met one, slamming into the ship near its drive unit and triggering a second huge explosion. Seeker was numbed for a moment, searching for what to do next. Goal – prevent their capture of the Other Moon, either by successful defence or displacing into interstellar space and destroying the control interface. Seeker looked down at the fried controls, the blank radar. Useless now. Subgoal – reach the orrery. By the time Seeker had donned a suit and made it to the surface, a ship had already slid to a relative halt above her, the other vanishing over the horizon to aft. It was landing between her and the habitation units – no longer holding pens – that housed her children. Nothing to be done. She had to reach the Orrery. Above Seeker the sky flickered again as the Other Moon dropped out of Frameshift. Stupid – they’d only been in flight for a handful of minutes. If this attack succeeded the other Dyn would make it here in a few weeks and then the Other Moon would be theirs. Seeker bounded across the surface of the Other Moon, even as the remaining ship turned its guns on her habitation dome. Bullets peppered complex, working their way around the machine-shop and reactor, avoiding her quarters but destroying decades of work. They meant to take her alive – all of her research, her personal musings, her life-essence was there, intact and recoverable, all her secrets. Seeker considered turning back, halting her progress for a moment, but then a second wave of rounds peppered the regolith, exploding and throwing out clouds of dust and shrapnel. The only way was forward. The ship overhead was disgorging landers, thin metal frames propelled by dirty solid-fuel rockets. Four Dyn rode each one, flipping and braking at the last moment. Seeker was almost at the orrery now – the Dome she’d thrown over it was just visible over the short horizon. A lander dipped low, crash-landing just metres from the dome, shattering it apart. Seeker had already drawn a gaspistol, had already put one needle through the faceplate of an invader before they noticed her. They had explosive projectile weapons, and fired indiscriminately at the surrounding space, aiming to suppress and not kill. Seeker jumped high and released a grapple line, embedding it in one attacker’s suit, using its momentum to pull her down towards the surviving two. She put a needle through one and fought limb-to-limb with the other, slashing and weaving with the fury any Dyn throughout all the millions of years of their history would have recognised – defend your territory, your domain, at any cost. As she’d fought her siblings, and then fought to defend her tiny domain in the Night on Firsthome, and then fought to protect her space-guns during the last days of her existence as an ordinary Dyn, she fought now. She punctured the suit of the last attacker, slicing the flesh below its jaw-plates. It fell slowly, leaking pale blood into the vacuum. Seeker raised herself to her full height, backing towards the Orrery. It was still there beneath the dome, surrounded by broken sensors and robotic instruments. She had to destroy it, everything counted on it, nothing else mattered. Why was this so important to her, more important than her life and domain? Other Dyn would abuse the power. No, that was not sufficient. Seeker raised the pistol and smashed it into one manipulator arm; it cracked and fell, but that would not be enough. Why did it matter so much that the Dyn not gain access to the network? Because they would perpetuate Dynic suffering, yes, but there was something more. Two more landers slammed into the ground, close now. Eight Dyn began to close in. Seeker knew, somehow. She hadn’t wanted to admit why she’d turned back from the interstice. It was because she was afraid. The Others were missing, carefully and meticulously cleared away from the Network they had created. The Other Moon had refused to enter the Network, as if it were afraid. The nightmares grew worse the longer she travelled in Frameshift. Add together the anomalies, and see which hypotheses explain them. A round skimmed close to her head. Seeker fired, missing, then working the gun closer to the next Dyn. The needle-shot knocked it backwards, sending it skimming over the low ground. They were close now, aiming to restrain her, hand to hand. Seeker backed towards the Orrery, climbing through the hole in the dome, drawing the grapple in her other limb, searching for something to damage. She took a swipe at a robot arm, but it didn’t budge. A Dyn bounded in after her, grasping a limb. She swing the grapple-gun, gouging a hole in its suit, but another Dyn was already climbing through. She fired the gas-pistol once, tearing a hole through the new attacker’s faceplate, then pulled the trigger again but it was out of ammunition. She screamed then, turning on the radio and wailing her fury at a universe she knew was not indifferent, rather it was actively hostile. There was still that voice, that liar’s voice repeating endlessly “We cannot allow a rogue unchallengeable power over all Dyn. Grant us the use of your vessel and you will be honoured.” The unknown Liar with the colossal fleet would gain everything- Seeker’s knowledge base and technology, her ability to explore the universe. The Dyn would expand and then… she did not know, but she knew it had destroyed the Others. Seeker flung the gas pistol at the last attacker and jabbed forward with a suited limb. She had a handle on the enemy’s explosive rifle, snatching it and turning back to the Orrery. Maybe this could do some damage. She turned, raised the weapon and fired a round wildly. It exploded, blowing one of the perfectly rounded pebbles apart. A few more shots and the Other Moon would be disabled. Behind her, three Dyn drew their own weapons. Seeker never saw them fire.