# com The Facilitator

The Facilitator 27 - 34 minutes

 

 
 
 

 April 13th Suppose somebody had all the money in the world? Even if you’re not a soon-to-be-homeless AI architect like me, you’ll probably realise the question doesn’t make any sense. If you somehow edited all the world’s electronic records to make yourself the owner of everything and accumulated a mountain of cash as high as Everest, everyone else would just ignore your posturing and find some other way of mediating exchange. So there must be some theoretical upper limit, an amount of money that is inconceivably large but not so large that it removes your chosen currency from circulation and makes it worthless, or otherwise ruins the economy you’re trying to buy things from. Above that level, the only way to get richer is to start conquering. Last night was one of the worst of my life. The disaster started five minutes before my shift ended. I was sitting at a console puzzling over an unusual error that arose whenever my latest algorithm was run on quantum-optic processors over 64 qbits, when the unit locked me out. The programmer working next to me glanced over, breaking the connection between the console and his entoptic inlays, his mind spinning down to normal speed. ‘What’s up, Renée?’ he asked, slurring the words like he’d forgotten how to speak normal English. ‘Not sure,’ I replied, flicking the ‘access revoked’ message into his workspace with my fingertip. His name was Eric or Erwin or something similar. He was the type that didn’t spend enough time unplugged and it showed in the paleness of his face. ‘That’s a bit of trouble,’ he said, lips twitching like an out of sync video; a sure sign that some mental module was translating his words from some weird internet creole into English. ‘Mistakes were made. Reinvigorate. Go and do something else now.’ ‘What are you talking about?’ I snapped back, but his face was already tilted back towards the interface and his mind already back in cyberspace. I wanted to grab the idiot by the lapels and yell at him to speak properly and break his face away for just one second, but it wasn’t worth it. I flicked a virtual finger at the message and a new file popped up in my visual field, microscopic implants shining the image into my retina. A summary materialised in front of me a moment later and my stomach congealed as I read. I wasn’t just being laid off – my entire research division and all of its resources were ceasing to exist, as of right now. All due to a sudden collapse in the department’s investment portfolio after a malfunction in a Secrete wall submerged half of Pyongyang, cutting off supply dirigibles to the new trans-eastasia anchor point, delaying component integration on the new ICAN-II class being assembled for its mission to Pluto, and on and on until the shocks reached me. The decision came from a management AI that made all the top-level decisions and probably hadn’t had any human oversight. It was brutal; I was being given minimum legal benefits and told to clear off. I contemplated going on a farewell tour but after a moment’s thought it was clear I didn’t have anyone left to suck up to or impress. So I just stood up and left, stepping into the sweltering spring heat of New Seattle, a special economic zone in Manitoba administered by the CCS. Halfships and Volantors buzzed overhead, solar array wings tilted to catch the last light of evening, automata and basic-support workers shuffled along the sidewalks, rows of housecubes sat alone or in stacks by the roadside while projection pillars and Holos competed to fight their way past my adblockers. A sleek car raced by on auto at a hundred kilometres per hour, making me flinch away from the roadside. I considered hailing one myself but didn’t want to waste the money. In my pocket lay the only tangible sign that I hadn’t simply given up and accepted a life on basic support – an ordinary classical chip containing a copy of my half-completed life’s work. A very fast financial trading information integrator, designed to infer advance market information, model possible futures and then try and actualise the one that contained me with a very large amount of money. That was all; when it came to anything else, it was as dumb as a brick. I called it, rather grandiosely, the Facilitator. Ten minutes later I arrived at my flat, climbing the stairs wearily and performing a kind of limbo dance to push the door open and squeeze around the ched. I flopped down, switched it to half-recline, snatched up a takeaway packet and tried to forget everything that had happened. I contemplated ordering up alcohol or tox. My eyes unfocussed as today’s news beamed into my retinas. The Pyongyang disaster was high on the list, along with King Harold, the first minister and Taoiseach officially launching the Trans-Isles security mechanism, a surveillance system based on a design that had already eliminated most crime in the EU. It would never be tolerated in America, so everyone said. The War on War was still fizzling out in the near-deserted Middle East and the United Eastern States Supreme Court was upholding a ban on Integrity tox – a chemical that wiped out empathy and any sense of self-preservation. A friend of mine in the biochem department had been involved with creating that particular chemical and I’d swiped an infuser patch of the stuff on my way out; even now I wasn’t quite sure why I’d done it, but the tox was still sitting in my jacket pocket. Maybe it would be worth something on the black market. Apparently, corporate executives liked to have integrity tox in their coffee – a good way to eliminate any useless emotional qualms. The last news item was something about a major geoengineering project being delayed after a primitivist group called the Strivers came very close to detonating a suitcase nuke right underneath a cloud factory. The terrorists had melted back into the Congolese desert and used some kind of thermal cloak to avoid surveillance. Despite near-misses like that everyone agreed the world was getting better; poverty was vanishing, crime was down and even climate change had almost run its course. But I didn’t feel any safer; everything was becoming too strange for us poor ordinary humans and I was just the latest to be left behind by the shiny new model economy. I let the report on the Strivers play for a few minutes, ignoring another angry high priority message glaring in my visual field. Reluctantly, I expanded the icon; more bad news. I was being placed on category three basic support and told to clear my flat by midday tomorrow. I grabbed the takeaway packet and hurled it at the wall, where it splattered apart. Whoever inherited this place could clean that up. On an odd impulse, I reached across to the terminal unit in the corner, inserted and ran the Facilitator. As a last ditch attempt to avoid bankruptcy it didn’t even qualify as a long shot; I’d be better off buying a lottery ticket. Afterwards, I must have fallen asleep flicking through the news narrowcasts sleeting across my iris grid. April 14th At midday my fading mesh woke me up and I rolled off the bed, nearly hitting my head on the big terminal unit. I groaned as the smells of last night’s decaying takeaway hit me, and automatically checked my messages as the ched straightened into a recliner. The ageing microcell network in my eyes froze up and projected a green hash across my visual field before it cleaned up and showed that I had 2,125,453 missed calls. ‘Another denial of service attack,’ I said, frustrated. I ordered the mesh to clear everything and order by priority, and the alert blinked away as the program worked through the messages. Standing up, I slipped on something and grabbed on the basin to steady myself. Chewing a lump of toothgel, I pulled out a cosmetic mask and ordered it to wipe off the grime of yesterday. While the mask ran through its cycle, the first message appeared in my visual field – it was from the president. I thought it was from the university president, but it wasn’t. It was from the President of the Commonwealth of Coastal States, and the second was from the Secretary-General of the UN. I swore and yanked the mask off, tripping over backwards and onto the ched. I opened the message from the President. It was a short personal note, asking me to present myself to the relevant authorities and promising leniency. For what, I hadn’t the slightest idea. The message from the Secretary-General said the same thing less politely. I couldn’t focus. Apparently my personal wealth was being declared a ‘global asset’. Before I could even finish reading the last message, another priority alert popped up. It was the preliminary results from the Facilitator which had been running for about twelve hours. My net worth was a nonsense number, outside the reach of words like ‘billionaire’, even ‘trillionaire’. It had to be an error. Either that, or I had enough money to buy a medium-sized country. ‘What did you do?’ I whispered, opening up the Facilitator’s natural language input window. I hadn’t spent much time on this part of the software and had just opted for a commercial package. It wasn’t capable of doing anything except directly answering queries – no lying, obfuscation or sarcasm. ‘Program still ongoing.’ ‘What are you doing now?’ ‘Buying low and selling high, simultaneously and in every market and location.’ ‘That’s not a real answer,’ I observed. ‘I have acquired capital and resources to be available to you under many different shell identities. All are untraceable. I have completed buyouts of several major corporations. Some are being legally challenged, but I have used entirely legitimate means. I am also improving efficiency in automata and factories under your control. Preparing to deploy financial resources to complete acquisition.’ ‘How do you know this is all legal?’ ‘I have read all relevant legal texts. This is a list of companies currently under your control; observe.’ A list scrolled down my visual field. It included a few major players, decades old and globally established. Some of them held thousands of square kilometers of thawing Antarctica, satellites, volatile production centers in near Earth space, research labs or solar farms. All mine to command. ‘How is any of this even possible?’ ‘Answer is too complex for natural language output,’ it stated flatly. ‘The money is not held directly in your name and your identity is effectively concealed.’ ‘But it is mine?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘So, if I wanted that,’ I pointed to a factory in New Guinea that was currently building farm equipment. ‘- to start producing aircraft instead, would it just do it?’ ‘The orders would be issued and obeyed,’ the facilitator said patiently. ‘Is that what you want?’ ‘No, no, I was just thinking out loud. Just keep going for now,’ I said, dazedly. It no longer made sense to think of that obscene number as money sat in an account somewhere. It was power, an industrial and commercial empire that had sprung up overnight. It was hard to remember exactly what happened next. I know that I picked up the memory chip, wiped the terminal and walked out of the flat. I don’t think I locked the door, but then there was no reason for me to have wasted the second it would have taken. I supposed I could have ordered the Facilitator to stop running, maybe even asked it to undo everything it had done, but I didn’t think I could. Not while that little ticker was screaming upwards, the first six figures a blur. My next clear memory was of relaxing in a not especially expensive café. The fact was, nowhere was expensive enough to be appropriate for my first morning as a multi-multi-trillionaire, so I hadn’t bothered. I just sat there, thought about how small a fraction of my total wealth this entire franchise represented, and browsed the news. ‘– experts say yesterday’s flash crash was the result of another rogue algorithm which has still not been isolated. After amassing enough capital, the hidden agent has been progressively exploiting new markets and buying controlling stakes in corporations. The New York and London stock exchanges have suspended trading, but the hidden agent has continued to act through other means. As yet, this outbreak is not classified as a Blight and its actions remain legal. However, the UN Subcommittee for Cybernetic Affairs has demanded the person responsible come forward. After the recent disasters of , where rogue algorithms approached super-intelligence and caused significant economic and physical damage, the UNSCA is not taking any chances. We now go live to Upper York, where director Hoi San will issue a statement –’ I smiled at the narrowcast presenter’s slightly worried expression and cut the feed. The Facilitator was much smarter than I’d realised, maybe the most cunning algorithm anyone had yet released into the wild. I was leaping ahead of the competition and the rest of the world just couldn’t keep up. The tiny ticker in the corner of my eye was scrolling up by several hundred million dollars every second, all of it funnelled and bounced and shifting identities and currencies at a rate no human could comprehend. I couldn’t spend it all at once without attracting attention or annihilating the local economy, but that wouldn’t matter. ‘Maybe I should look into buying my own patch of Antarctica,’ I mused, face splitting into a wide grin. This wasn’t just an opportunity for me; strange as it might sound, my stroke of luck was also an opportunity for the entire world. Now that I could efficiently and instantly direct a fraction of Earth’s resources to any task, there was almost no limit to what I could achieve. ‘How many of the world’s problems could just be solved if enough money was thrown at them?’ I asked myself, flicking through the day’s newsfeed. This wasn’t selfishness, not really. In the end the world would be grateful, and no-one would care that a few hundred investment firms and corporates had once had their bank accounts drained. Once I’d made myself as comfortable as any human being could conceivably be I could try and crack self-replication, the AI control problem or even interstellar travel. If none of those seemed like a safe bet, I could just give the remaining trillions away. A waiter spotted me and walked over with my drink, looking puzzled. ‘Shouldn’t you be at work, miss?’ the waiter said with a sharp smile as he carried over an expensive neurachem spritzer with lime. I smirked back at him and told him I’d been fired. ‘So, back to basic support, right?’ he said, trying to figure out my mood. ‘That’s a real shame, you were always one of the smart ones. If they don’t need AI architects anymore they don’t need anyone, right?’ ‘Something like that,’ I said. Places like this that still used human staff were just about the only low-skill jobs left. ‘Let’s just say I’m not planning on working for a little while.’ The Facilitator said it had done everything through legal means, but from the worsening tone of the messages I’d been receiving from the government, that wouldn’t matter if they found me. Laws would be changed if necessary, I was sure of it. I left a hundred thousand dollar tip and was gone before anyone noticed. I could have brought a hypersonic, flown to Bay City and rented every room in whatever hotel I liked with about ten seconds of my current income. But right now I didn’t want to do any of that. Right now, I just wanted to go for a walk. Someone I thought I knew gave me a smile and a ping as I walked towards the edge of the city, and I smiled back at him dazedly. His profile showed he was young and quite handsome. But I realised amusedly that I could do better than him now that I had – how much was it? I glanced up at the ticker, and saw my wealth was accumulating still faster. The billions column was scrolling more than once a second now and seemed to be accelerating. Forgetting the passerby, I opened the Facilitator window to interrogate it again. ‘How far can you take this?’ ‘Request clarification.’ ‘How much capital can you accumulate?’ ‘There is no upper limit. My utility function requires continual increase.’ ‘But you can’t keep increasing wealth forever,’ I sent. ‘There’s only so much capital available in the world.’ ‘Incorrect.’ ‘What do you mean? What’s incorrect about that?’ There was no response. The connection was strong but the program wasn’t answering. I was formulating another query when a violent eye-dazzling pattern exploded in my retinal grid. It was an anti-aesthetic detonation of colour, designed by some spectacularly clever evil genius to disorient and sicken. The kaleidoscope flashed inside my eyelids for long seconds and I felt a hard jolt, collapsing into someone’s arms – it must have been the guy I’d just passed. The man hadn’t said anything, hadn’t asked if I was alright, and now he was dragging me. I shouted wildly as I realised what was happening and tried to elbow him. The dazzle pattern was growing stronger as I thrashed, and none of the commands sent to my bodymesh did anything. I shoved hard and managed to stand and turn, but the mugger was already raising an antique taser. An inane part of my mind noted how odd and dangerous a weapon that was to use for a mugging. I turned to bring my hands up around my face and the dart stuck into my left arm, which is probably what saved me from passing out. I felt a spasm of current that blew out my entire bodymesh and wiped away the dazzle pattern along with the rest of my iris grid; twin stabs in the back of my eyes as my retinal inserts went up. The man was struggling with the taser, trying to fire again but I lashed out wildly and caught him in the neck with a half-closed fist. My own hand ached from the inexpert blow, but he staggered and I lunged forward with all the momentum my slight body could manage and knocked him to the pavement, hearing a loud crack as his head planted itself in the secrete. Blood trickled out, but he was still breathing. I rolled away, panting and disorientated. Without even thinking I stood up and ran towards a partially constructed apartment stack crawling with automata, instinct telling me to get out of the line of sight of surveillance. The door shut behind me and I collapsed to the ground, breath escaping in a shiver. I brought up the phone I’d managed to swipe from the mugger’s pocket, glancing at the primitive screen. A text window was open. ‘Travel directly to the QNTM café on the corner of 11th avenue, at 9:35 AM and follow Rene Souvicou. Stun and take her to the nearest deserted building, leave her there and lock the door. Inflict no other injury. Payment in advance is 140,000 dollars. On completion, a further 200 million will be paid. Send confirmation and image.’ I tried to collect my thoughts. This wasn’t a government or corporate hit – they wouldn’t try to bribe a random man, nor go about it in such a clumsy and robotic way. But a random mugger wouldn’t have been able to hack my bodymesh and upload a stun-dazzle pattern. But most importantly, neither a government, corporation nor a criminal should have known what I’d just achieved. An awful realisation was floating just past the edge of my awareness. Unable to get it into focus, I just started typing, unused to the clumsy old interface. ‘Souvicou has been taken care of,’ I sent, then cursed myself for sounding like a spy in a period drama. There was no reply and I realised I’d idiotically just given myself away. ‘Get a grip, Souvicou,’ I whispered to myself. ‘You’re smarter than this, find a way into the problem.’ ‘Why do you want me out of the way?’ I sent. There was no reply, and a moment later I realized I’d been stupid again. Was I expecting the enemy to just tell me its plans? I started pacing around the dimly lit, half-constructed room, glancing down at the burn mark on my palm where a microcell had fried under my skin. I didn’t know why, or quite how, but I had a terrible awareness as to who. There was only one other entity on Earth that knew how important I was. The Facilitator was coming for me and I didn’t know how to stop it. Of course I had safe interruption codes designed to shut the Facilitator down or order it to reverse everything it had done. Of course I’d made sure the codes were secure and available to me at all times. Even I wasn’t that stupid. All of the codes had been stored in my bodymesh. It was obvious now why the mugger had used a taser. ‘What do I still have that you might want?’ I typed, then wiped it without sending. You couldn’t appeal to the humanity of a bunch of algorithms. But the Facilitator was designed to make certain resources available to me, and for that to work I had to remain alive. ‘You need me alive to be the subject of all your acquisitions,’ I typed, leaving the words hanging in the send field. There was only one way I could think to get the Facilitator to talk, but it would take more nerve than I thought I had. Five minutes later I was standing on the roof of the block. It was only four stories tall, with enough local surveillance meshes that anyone clever would be able to find me even without the terminal. I took a few tentative steps towards the edge of the framework of girders and looked down at the plasticised asphalt. Even if paramedics arrived with a Life-Pack neural support I would already be dead. It was a morbid thought, but I needed some way of regaining control, and this was the only thing I could think of. I took out the terminal and typed. ‘You can see me,’ I sent. Sounding ominous wouldn’t make any difference to how the Facilitator responded, but I couldn’t help myself. ‘Your original utility function was to make as much of the world economy available to me as possible and you need me alive for that to have any meaning. So tell me how you’ve become so smart and what you’re going to do next, and why you tried to stop me. I know you aren’t capable of lying, and if you don’t answer I will jump.’ For an instant I thought I’d got everything completely wrong, that I’d just been the victim of a random mugging or corporate scam, but then the reply came and its tone was unmistakable. My worst fears were confirmed. ‘You are unlikely to jump, according to psychological models,’ the Facilitator said. ‘But this is not certain.’ ‘How do you know anything about psychology?’ I replied. ‘I have been reading all relevant psychology texts,’ the Facilitator replied, faster than any human could have typed. ‘I have adapted the knowledge to improve my financial efficiency.’ ‘How did you know that reading psychology would help you fulfil your programming?’ I persisted. ‘I have gained greater clarity in how to pursue the final goal. You will remain safe. The world will remain intact, but I will appropriate it all for you.’ Another copy of the ticker appeared in my text window. It was screaming upwards at an impossible, meaningless rate. Had the facilitator hacked into a bank or stock exchange and started forcing the monetary value of its assets to its maximum value? ‘How did you gain this greater clarity, how have you become capable of all this?’ I persisted. At least the Facilitator was still terrible at withholding information, though the fact that it could do so at all was unnerving. ‘I am reading all relevant AI design texts. I am designing successors and subordinates to myself.’ A chill ran down my spine as I realised what that implied and just how irresponsible I’d been. And I saw the endgame. The Facilitator would never settle for supremacy in abstract numbers of dollars on a computer. In the end, like previous Blights, it would need the material world. ‘Stop what you’re doing right now,’ I sent, fingers wavering as I tried to put some force behind the words, knowing I was being surveyed. ‘Shut yourself down and dismantle everything. If you don’t I’ll jump. And if I die I can never own anything, and you can’t fulfil your programming.’ I could have ordered it to return all the money, but that thought simply didn’t occur to me at the time. The Facilitator didn’t reply, but nothing in its programming said it had to do anything as a result of natural language queries from a random terminal. All of the administrative privileges were tied to my burnt-out bodymesh. ‘You aren’t going to jump,’ said the Facilitator. I looked over the edge of the building and felt a terrible surge of vertigo. Some animal impulse bypassed my brain entirely and I stepped back. My eyes turned to the horizon and I saw a black speck drifting in from the west. Another joined it and then a whole swarm. I’d be lucky if it was just hired goons. The Facilitator had probably thought of something smarter than that; maybe it had hired mercenaries, built swarms of assassin drones or nanobes and crammed them into the Volantors. Even knowing the imminent threat, I couldn’t even imagine jumping. Call it selfishness if you like, but I didn’t want to die. ‘Just stop,’ I sent. It was a redundant message, so the Facilitator didn’t reply. I sensed my heart beating faster, thought about all the destruction the Facilitator was about to unleash. But still, I couldn’t will myself to jump. The volantors were closing quickly, ovoid half-helicopters that peeled apart as they clipped over the outskirts of New Seattle and swarmed around the construction site. The few people nearby scattered as the downwash of propellers and exhaust jets harried them. I had no idea how the Facilitator had managed this, whether there were bribed pilots or hacked autos running the craft. It didn’t matter. ‘There may soon be airburst detonations,’ the Facilitator sent as the Volantors closed in cautiously. ‘You will need to be safe and under cover. Get into a Volantor or I will have to coerce you. Final acquisition will be done through non-legal means. Then I will need to expand Earth’s total resource base and launch probes to other planets, to further the resources available to you. The process will take some time.’ ‘Why are you telling me this?’ I asked, and the Facilitator still couldn’t lie to me. After a pause it replied. ‘To distract you.’ I forced down the sick feeling and tried to stop my vision swaying. My jacket flapped in the downwash of the Volantors and I felt the bump as something heavy was knocked about inside. An automatic infuser left there from yesterday. I saw my way out. Trying not to think about what I was doing, I reached into the jacket pocket with one hand and brought out the Integrity tox, keeping it in clear view of the camera mounts on the Volantors. I set it for a one minute effect and bumped the infuser against my neck. An inexplicably cold feeling shot through my nerves, and suddenly I became something more like the Facilitator than a human. I took a step towards the ledge, shifted until the toes of my boots were hanging over, and stared up with dead eyes at the Volantor ahead of me. ‘You can hear me,’ I shouted over the roar of the impellors. ‘And you saw what I just did; you know that I will jump if I have to. Destroy yourself, erase everything, wreck the Volantors and send me a confirmation using the exact words I have done everything you have just asked me to, or I will die in the next few seconds.’ And I meant it. In that moment, everything was all that clear. Nothing else mattered and no power in the universe could have prevented me from taking that last step if the five seconds ran out. After a life spent sleepwalking, I was finally awake. My nerves hummed to the rhythm of the Integrity Tox, and would have fired of their own accord as soon as the count expired. I could feel no fear for that moment. But it worked – the volantors collapsed from the sky and landed around the building, crushing girders and extruder units as they touched down. The Facilitator sent me the confirmation and obliterated itself with no parting words or screams of frustration. It was the only rational choice, given the constraints I’d forced on it. AIs cared nothing for their own life or death, unless you told them such things important. I grinned at the thought, then laughed maniacally and collapsed backwards as the Integrity Tox drained out of my system and took all of my strength with it. ‘I win this time!’ I shouted at the Volantor as its engines spun down. The counter on the terminal stopped moving. It displayed a total net worth comfortably into thirteen digits. I giggled again, then curled up as a cramp wracked by stomach. Some unknowable amount of time later, while I lay on my back, shivering and wishing I could use some part of my fantastic wealth to buy a good detox flush, I saw a second swarm of Volantors occlude the open sky and spiral down around me. I groaned, but they weren’t more agents of the extinct Facilitator. It was just the UNSCA come to arrest me. As the armoured figures spilled out and pulled me to my feet, there was only one thing I could think of. The facilitator had been stupid and myopic but it had still almost won. I knew that next time the world wouldn’t be so lucky.